Thales|Everything is water in one form or another.
Anaximander|Everything originated from the ‘apeiron’ (the “infinite” or “indefinite”), rather than from a particular element.
Anaximander|The inhabited portion of the Earth is the flat top face of a cylinder, hanging in space, equidistant to everything else.
Anaximander|The first creatures originated from the moist element by evaporation; humans originated from some other kind of animal.
Anaximander|The world is not eternal and will be destroyed back into the apeiron, from which new worlds will be born.
Anaximenes|Everything comes from air: when it is thinned it becomes fire, when it is condensed it becomes cloud, then water, earth, and stones.
Anaximenes|The earth is a flat disc and floats on air.
Pythagoras|Mathematical order pervades the physical world.
Pythagoras|The soul is immortal and it transmigrates into other kinds of animals.
Pythagoras|We remember a lot of what we know from a previous life.
Xenophanes|We may get nearer and nearer to the truth but our knowledge is our creation; it is in fact conjecture.
Xenophanes|Each group shapes their gods in the likeness of their own.
Heraclitus|Everything is a coming together of opposites: health and disease, good and evil, hot and cold define each other.
Heraclitus|Everything is in flux: on those stepping into rivers staying the same, other and other waters flow.
Heraclitus|This world-order, the same of all, no god nor human did create, but it ever was and is and will be: everliving fire.
Parmenides|There can never have been nothing; everything must always have existed.
Parmenides|It is not possible for anything to pass into nothing; everything is eternal.
Parmenides|The universe is a single unchanging entity; all is one.
Parmenides|What appears as change is something that occurs within an enclosed and unchanging system.
Empedocles|Everything is made up of four elements that are perennial: earth, water, air, and fire.
Protagoras|Man is the measure of all things.
Protagoras|We have no means of knowing whether gods exist or not or of what sort they may be.
Democritus & Leucippus|Everything is made up of indivisible particles (atoms) that are too small to be seen.
Democritus & Leucippus|All change in the universe consists of atoms altering formations or locations.
Democritus & Leucippus|The universe is not a continuum, but consists of separate entities.
Zeno of Elea|A moving thing must travel half way before arriving at the goal, thus an endless sequence of fractions of the total distance; motion is impossible.
Zeno of Elea|The time period of an arrow’s motion is composed of moments and all moments contain an arrow at rest, so the arrow cannot be moving.
Zeno of Elea|An impeccably logical argument can lead to a false conclusion.
Socrates|Knowledge of the universe makes little practical difference; it does not affect our lives, our behaviour.
Socrates|We need to know how to conduct our lives and ourselves.
Socrates|Things like ‘justice’ do exist; not materially, but in some sort of essence.
Socrates|To a person who preserves their integrity no real, long-term harm can ever come.
Socrates|We should pity the perpetrator of injustice, not the victim of injustice.
Socrates|No one really knowingly does wrong.
Socrates|There can be no cut and dried answers; answers themselves are open to question.
Aristippus|Pleasure is the end; it is what goal our actions aim at and what is valuable for its own sake.
Aristippus|We should not defer pleasures that are ready at hand for the sake of future pleasures.
Plato|Everything is an ephemeral and imperfect copy of a permanent Form (or Idea) outside space and time.
Plato|Underlying our messy world, there is another reality with all the perfection of mathematics.
Plato|The underlying reality is accessible to the mind and the intellect; the body (with inaccurate senses, illnesses, fears, desires, etc.) affords us distractions.
Plato|Our souls possess the knowledge of the Forms before our birth; learning after birth is just recollection.
Plato|In our visible world with space and time, everything is becoming, nothing is.
Plato|Our bodies are ephemeral but our souls are our permanent Forms, timeless and indestructible; death frees us from the bodily distractions.
Plato|Our aim in life should be to reject the pleasures of the body and to penetrate to the level of underlying reality.
Plato|Knowledge is true belief (judgment, opinion) with an account of the reason why it is true.
Plato|The moral Forms set the objective moral standards by which human conduct and character should be judged.
Plato|Is the pious loved by the gods because it is pious, or is it pious because it is loved by the gods?
Plato|Human beings are made up of three conflicting elements: passion (desire, appetite), intellect (reason), and will (spirit).
Plato|Virtue is not solely a matter of knowing what is right; intellect should govern passions through the will.
Plato|The only harm that can come to a person is harm to the soul.
Plato|It is better to suffer wrong than to commit it.
Plato|Everything and everybody should be questioned, taking nothing for granted.
Plato|Democracy degenerates into tyranny because most people do not have the intellectual skills to think through difficult political issues.
Plato|A philosophically aware class should govern society through an intermediate police class for the happiness of the whole community.
Plato|Women share by nature in every way of life just as men do, but in all of them women are weaker than men.
Plato|Girls should be brought up on equal terms with boys.
Plato|All artistic creation is a form of imitation (‘mimesis’).
Plato|Art is doubly deceptive, creating illusory semblances of illusory semblances of the Forms; artists have no role in good societies striving for truth.
Plato|A thing is not beautiful because of its shape, color, etc. but because it has a relation with the Form of the beautiful.
Aristotle|There is only one world that we can philosophize about – the one we live in.
Aristotle|If we stray beyond the ground covered by experience we wander into empty talk.
Aristotle|Mind is potentially whatever is thinkable: thinking is like characters being written on an unscribed tablet.
Aristotle|A thing is whatever it is by virtue of its form and structure – and not just by virtue of the materials it is made of.
Aristotle|Individuals are members of a kind of substance because they share a property (an essence) with all and only the other members of that kind.
Aristotle|The material cause of a thing is what it is made of.
Aristotle|The efficient cause of a thing is what does or makes it.
Aristotle|The formal cause of a thing is what gives it the shape by which it is identified.
Aristotle|The final cause of a thing is the ultimate reason for it.
Aristotle|An object’s form, though not material, is inherent in the this-worldly object.
Aristotle|The soul is the form of the body: though not material, it is a system of abilities inherent in animate bodies of suitable structure.
Aristotle|The real point of everything is what it does, what it is for.
Aristotle|Change occurs when the ongoing material that is part of something acquires a new form.
Aristotle|There cannot be an infinite series of moved movers; it must come to a halt in some unmoved mover, which is God.
Aristotle|Spoken words are the symbols of mental experience and written words are the symbols of spoken words.
Aristotle|All men have not the same writings or speech sounds, but the mental experiences which these directly symbolize are the same for all.
Aristotle|Thoughts are ‘likenessess’ (homoiomata) of things.
Aristotle|We may assume the superiority, ceteris paribus, of the demonstration which derives from fewer postulates or hypotheses.
Aristotle|‘Eudaimonia’ (happiness, well-being, flourishing), being something final and self-sufficient, is the end at which all actions aim.
Aristotle|In order to achieve happiness and self-fulfilment, we must be members of a society; humans are political animals and personal isolation is no good.
Aristotle|A good, virtuous person is someone who has ideal character traits; these traits derive from natural internal tendencies, but need to be nurtured.
Aristotle|A virtue (e.g. courage) is the midway point between two extremes (e.g. cowardice and foolhardiness); our aim should be balance.
Aristotle|The purpose of government is to enable its citizens to live the full and happy life.
Aristotle|People with no autonomous rationality – their work is the use of the body, and this is the best that can come from them – are slaves by nature.
Aristotle|The male is by nature superior and the female inferior, the male ruler and the female subject.
Aristotle|Poetry is more philosophical and more serious than history: poetry speaks more of generalities, while history speaks of particulars.
Aristotle|Tragedy is sophisticated and powerful imitation.
Aristotle|Tragedy is done by performers and not by way of narrative, bringing about through pity and fear the purification (‘katharsis’) of such emotions.
Aristotle|Like a plant, a good work of art is an intricate arrangement of parts, all of which are necessary and contribute to the whole.
Eubulides|Starting with one grain, and adding grain after grain, no single grain can make the difference between a number of grains and a heap.
Eubulides|Someone says “What I am now saying is false”; if it is true, it is false; and if it is false, it is true.
Eubulides|A hooded man enters the room and you do not know who he is, but he is in fact your brother; so you do not know who your brother is.
Diogenes|The only thing that matters is the difference between true values and false values.
Diogenes|All social conventions (public/private, naked/clothed, etc.) are nonsense.
Diogenes|I am a citizen of the world.
Pyrrho|People over the world believe in opposite things; knowledge is subjective.
Pyrrho|We cannot assume the truth of one explanation rather than any other.
Pyrrho|We should just go with the flow – the customs of wherever and whenever we happen to live.
Epicurus|All there is in the universe are atoms and space.
Epicurus|Atoms are indestructible and eternal, but their combinations (objects) are always changing.
Epicurus|We, body and mind, are among the ephemeral objects built of atoms.
Epicurus|What enables us to be free is the existence of a certain randomness (swerve) in the motions of our atoms.
Epicurus|Don’t fear death; so long as you exist, death is not, and when death is, you are not.
Epicurus|Gods are far away and have no desire to be involved with us; it’s as if they don’t exist.
Epicurus|Happiness in this world should be our aim.
Epicurus|The way to be happy is to withdraw from public life into private communities of like-minded people.
Epicurus|We should enjoy pleasures in moderation, though no non-injurious activity needs to be forbidden.
Epicurus|The greatest pleasure is attainable through knowledge, friendship, and with freedom from fear.
Epicurus|Justice was never an entity in itself; it is a kind of agreement not to harm or be harmed, made between people in communities.
Zeno of Citium|The substance of God is the whole world and the heaven.
Zeno of Citium|That which reasons is superior to that which does not; nothing is superior to the world, therefore the world reasons.
Zeno of Citium|The nature of the universe is such that it accomplishes what is right and prevents the opposite.
Zeno of Citium|Law of nature is divine, and it has the power to force us to what is right, and to restrain us from what is wrong.
Zeno of Citium|Individual souls are part of the same fire as the world-soul of the universe.
Zeno of Citium|A virtuous life is life in agreement with nature.
Zeno of Citium|A bad feeling (desire, fear, pleasure, sorrow) is a disturbance of the mind repugnant to reason, and against Nature.
Timon of Phlius|Every proof has premises which it does not itself establish; no ultimate ground of certainty exists.
Epictetus|God is immanent in the natural order; he is fully accessible to rational human comprehension in the same way as all objects and events are.
Epictetus|Our rational minds are fragments of God’s mind; our rational nature qualifies us as his kindred.
Epictetus|It is the free volition that is the true self of the individual; our bodies, possessions, successes or failures are contingent facts about us.
Epictetus|Even one’s own death is of no particular concern if that is what the orderly workings of the universe require.
Epictetus|Action is determined by character (what seems right to an individual) and not by spontaneous impulses.
Epictetus|Autonomy is guaranteed not by the absence of antecedent causes but by the very nature of the reasoning faculty.
Epictetus|Our feelings are conditioned by our judgments of value; if we correct our judgments, our feelings will be corrected as well.
Epictetus|The choices made by others are of ethical significance only for the agents themselves; to anyone else they are externals and so of no consequence.
Epictetus|One should not be angry at someone for their bad decision; the proper response would be to help them to see their mistake.
Epictetus|We are naturally oriented toward our own well-being, but acting for our own sake often entails contributing to the common good.
Marcus Aurelius|God is one, pervading all things; all being is one, all law is one (the common reason which all thinking creatures possess) and all truth is one.
Marcus Aurelius|What keeps the whole world in being is Change; Universal Nature’s task is to shuffle, transpose, interchange, remove from one state and transfer to another.
Marcus Aurelius|Whatever happens, happens rightly; in the succession of events there is not mere sequence alone, but a rational order that is just and right.
Marcus Aurelius|Pain or pleasure, death or life, riches or poverty cannot be good or evil since they are all bestowed by Nature on the virtuous and the sinful alike.
Marcus Aurelius|Life is but a moment, body a prey of worms, soul an unquiet eddy, our fortune dark; the Reason, the divine spirit within us is our only guide.
Marcus Aurelius|Grief, anger, or fear are all rejections of something which has been decreed by the power that directs the universe – in other words, by Law.
Marcus Aurelius|Emotions must not affect reason; if they spread to the mind, reason must refrain from adding its own assumptions of their goodness or badness.
Marcus Aurelius|If you are distressed by anything external, it is not due to the thing itself but to your own estimate of it; and you have the power to revoke it.
Marcus Aurelius|All thoughts of blame are out of place: Gods cannot do wrong, people’s misdoings are unintentional, and chance cannot be reprimanded.
Marcus Aurelius|The wickedness of one person cannot injure another; it harms none but the culprit themself.
Marcus Aurelius|A good person welcomes every experience fate may weave for them, keeps the inner divinity in serenity and decorous obedience to God.
Marcus Aurelius|We must wait with a good grace for death; it is no more than a simple dissolving of the elements whereof each living thing is composed.
Marcus Aurelius|Death is a release from impressions of sense, from twitchings of appetite, from excursions of thought, and from service to the flesh.
Marcus Aurelius|Injustice is a sin; nature has constituted rational beings for their own mutual benefit, each to help his fellows according to their worth.
Marcus Aurelius|Our kinship is not of blood or human seed, but of a common intelligence in every person, which is an emanation from the deity.
Marcus Aurelius|The good life is not to be found in wealth, celebrity, or worldly pleasures; it lies in truthfulness, justice, self-discipline, courage, and independence.
Marcus Aurelius|Uniformity of opinion exists only upon things affecting the welfare of society; our consistent aim must be the benefit of our fellows and the community.
Plotinus|What exists is ultimately mental; for something to be created is for it to be thought.
Plotinus|There are three ascending levels of being: soul (humans), intellect, and good.
Plotinus|We should be in an attempted ascent towards one-ness with the good.
Plotinus|The arts do not simply imitate things, but they run back up to the forming principles from which nature derives; they also make up what is defective in things.
Saint Augustine|The flow of time exists for living creatures but not for God; it is created by God.
Saint Augustine|The flow of time does not exist independently of experience.
Saint Augustine|The future does not yet exist and the past no longer exists; the present is the inescapable mode of all existence.
Saint Augustine|Our whole worldly being, including our intellect, is dominated by our will.
Saint Augustine|Even if I am deceived, it is beyond doubt that I am not deceived in that I know myself to be: if I am deceived, I am.
Saint Augustine|There may be other things than our existence that we can know with absolute certainty.
Saint Augustine|Our soul is non-material and timeless, while our bodies are decaying material objects.
Saint Augustine|True knowledge is of a realm of timeless and perfect non-material entities.
Saint Augustine|Objects of the material world are ephemeral and decaying, and our knowledge about them are fleeting illusions.
Saint Augustine|God did not create evil, for evil has no positive nature; the loss of good has received the name “evil”.
Saint Augustine|A creature that sins through free will is more excellent than one that does not sin because it does not have free will.
Saint Augustine|Evils exist by the voluntary sin of the soul to which God gave free choice; if one does not sin by will, one does not sin.
Saint Augustine|People inherit a sinful nature: we do not always sin, as Adam did, by our own personal will, but contract original sin from him.
Saint Augustine|We cannot be saved through our own will alone, God’s intervention and grace are necessary; souls who go to hell are damned by God’s choice.
Saint Augustine|Each person is a citizen of two different communities simultaneously: the eternal kingdom of God and the unstable kingdoms of this world.
Saint Augustine|An unjust law is not actually a law.
Saint Augustine|Philosophers have wished, with amazing folly, to be happy here on Earth; true happiness is only available in Heaven after we die.
John Scotus Erigena|Reason and revelation are both valid ways of arriving at the same truth.
John Scotus Erigena|Since God is unknowable, it is impossible for Him to know himself.
Saint Anselm|The assumption that the greatest being possible exists only in the understanding and not in reality is contradictory because existence is greater than absence.
Saint Anselm|If the greatest being possible (God) exists in the understanding, it must also exist in reality.
Saint Anselm|Truth consists in rectitude: a thing (a sentence, a will) is correct whenever it is or does whatever it ought, or was designed, to be or do.
Saint Anselm|A statement is correct (has rectitude) when, and only when, it signifies that what-is is.
Saint Anselm|Freedom of choice is the power to preserve rectitude of will for its own sake, by self-initiated action.
Saint Anselm|That an agent wills what is right because it is right entails that they are neither compelled nor bribed to perform the act.
Saint Anselm|Freedom of choice neither is nor entails the power to sin; God and the good angels have freedom of choice, but they are incapable of sinning.
Saint Anselm|Human beings abandoned the will for justice and became unable to exercise their freedom; apart from divine grace, they cannot help but sin.
Thomas Aquinas|Reason and faith are very distinct; we believe in answers that are undecidable by reason.
Thomas Aquinas|All our rational knowledge is acquired through sensory experience.
Thomas Aquinas|A baby’s mind is like a clean slate (‘tabula rasa’) with nothing written on it.
Thomas Aquinas|The ‘essence’ of a thing is its description, and it is a separate matter from its existence.
Thomas Aquinas|The world’s essence must have preceded its existence, in God’s mind.
Thomas Aquinas|God’s own essence cannot have preceded his existence; God must be pure existence.
Thomas Aquinas|The universe needs a first mover, a first efficient cause, a necessary being, a perfect being, and an intelligence guiding natural bodies; those are God.
Thomas Aquinas|To know in a general and confused way that God exists is implanted in us by nature.
Thomas Aquinas|We cannot know what God is in this life, but we can, by natural reason, come to know what God is not (not changeable, not in time, etc.).
Thomas Aquinas|The soul is known by its acts; it realizes it exists through the fact that it understands and perceives.
Thomas Aquinas|A judgment is said to be true when it conforms to the external reality.
Thomas Aquinas|Sensation attains to things existing externally outside of the mind; the sense objects (the visible, the audible, etc.) exist outside the soul.
Thomas Aquinas|Thoughts can be about something (exhibit intentionality) because the form of the object thought about is in the mind of the thinker.
Thomas Aquinas|God cannot command cruelty because he is omnipotent: to sin is to fall short of a perfect action, which is repugnant to omnipotence.
Thomas Aquinas|Evil has no formal or final cause, it is a privation of them; it has a cause by way of an agent, not directly, but accidentally.
Thomas Aquinas|The defect in one thing yields to the good of another, or even to the universal good; if all evil were prevented, much good would be absent from the universe.
Thomas Aquinas|True well-being is otherworldly, but we can also achieve an imperfect spiritual well-being on Earth by living a morally good life.
Thomas Aquinas|The rational creature has a share of the eternal reason, whereby it has a natural inclination to its proper act and end (natural law).
Thomas Aquinas|If a human law deflects from the natural law, it is no longer a law but a perversion of law.
Thomas Aquinas|The best form of government is a mixed government: part kingship, part aristocracy, and part democracy.
William of Ockham|The more hypotheses you accept, the more you increase your risk of being wrong; plurality must never be posited without necessity.
William of Ockham|We are born blank slates: there are no innate certainties to be discovered in our minds, all knowledge comes from experience.
William of Ockham|The human mind comes fully equipped with a system for processing perceptions as they are acquired: an unspoken, mental language.
William of Ockham|We acquire knowledge in four quick steps: sensory cognition, intuitive cognition, recordative cognition, and abstractive cognition.
William of Ockham|In intuitive cognition, objects in the world cause us to be aware of their existence, and this explains and justifies our belief in them.
William of Ockham|Concepts are not mental objects (“ficta”) resembling objects in the world like pictures, but mental actions caused by the objects.
William of Ockham|There are no universals existing in individual substances or in the essences of things; being one thing and many things at the same time is contradictory.
William of Ockham|Universals are concepts caused in our minds (via recordative and abstractive cognition) when we perceive similar individuals.
William of Ockham|Since we have no experience of God in our lives on earth, we have no knowledge of God; belief in God is a matter of faith alone.
William of Ockham|The Trinity is a contradiction and the proofs of God’s existence inconclusive; theology is not logical and must never be mixed with philosophy.
William of Ockham|There are no constraints, external or internal, to what God can will: God’s free will establishes right and wrong.
William of Ockham|The pope does not have power to punish secular wrongs; he and the emperor should be separate but equal, each supreme in his own domain.
William of Ockham|Purely philosophical (non-theological) assertions should not be condemned or forbidden; anyone ought to be free to say freely what pleases them.
Niccolò Machiavelli|People in general are ungrateful, fickle, hypocritical, cowardly, and greedy.
Niccolò Machiavelli|Rulers will perish if they are always good; they must be cunning as a fox and as fierce as a lion.
Niccolò Machiavelli|Rulers should appear to be merciful, faithful, humane, upright, and most importantly, religious.
Niccolò Machiavelli|Rulers should not mind being considered cruel, as long as their actions restore order, peace, and loyalty in the end.
Niccolò Machiavelli|People are so simple and so much dominated by their immediate needs, that a deceitful person will always find plenty who are ready to be deceived.
Francis Bacon|The scientific method consists of data collection, hypothesis generation, experiment confirmation, and prediction.
Francis Bacon|Negative instances are as important as positive ones in guiding us to the right conclusions.
Francis Bacon|Our senses, feelings, and ideologies can be obstacles in our search for reliable knowledge.
Francis Bacon|Words are but the images of matter, to fall in love with them is to fall in love with a picture.
Thomas Hobbes|The universe consists of matter in motion, and nothing else exists; it is a vast machine.
Thomas Hobbes|Every moving object, including human beings, is some sort of machine.
Thomas Hobbes|Objects, people, and societies continuously cast and acquire parts but they stay the same over time because of the unbroken nature of the flux.
Thomas Hobbes|All mental processes consist of movements of matter inside the skull.
Thomas Hobbes|Psychological motivations are sorts of pushes: drives and repulsions, appetites and aversions.
Thomas Hobbes|Each person acts for some good to themselves, and appetites define what is good for each of us.
Thomas Hobbes|We are free agents if we are able to do as we will; liberty is the absence of external impediments.
Thomas Hobbes|Appetites (liking, love, etc.) are inherently unsatisfiable; they cannot cease until death.
Thomas Hobbes|The strongest aversion is the fear of death.
Thomas Hobbes|At bottom, the reason why people form societies is their fear of death.
Thomas Hobbes|In the state of nature there is no order or justice; violence and cunning rules – life is solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short.
Thomas Hobbes|In the state of nature, every person has the natural right to everything, especially to anything necessary for the preservation of one’s own life.
Thomas Hobbes|Societal alliances should be such that it is not in anyone’s interest to break laws.
Thomas Hobbes|Everyone should hand over power to a central authority with absolute power who imposes law and punishes law-breakers, for the good of all.
Thomas Hobbes|The central authority holds its power not from God or from any higher authority, but from the people, to protect their freedom and safety.
Thomas Hobbes|Any tyranny is better than social chaos.
Thomas Hobbes|One should be contented with so much liberty against other people, as one would allow others against oneself.
René Descartes|In mathematics we start from indubitable premises and deduce irrefutable conclusions.
René Descartes|To gain reliable knowledge, we should start from indubitable premises as in mathematics.
René Descartes|Sensual observations cannot be trusted, as they deceive us frequently.
René Descartes|I cannot be absolutely sure at any moment that I am not being deceived by an evil demon controlling my senses.
René Descartes|The only thing I can be sure of is that I am having the experiences that I am having.
René Descartes|I may not know my own nature or the nature of things, but that I exist is indubitable, because I am having experiences.
René Descartes|I can think of a perfect being even though I am imperfect; that being must be the cause of this idea within me, therefore it (God) exists.
René Descartes|If I think carefully, I can be certain of my conclusions, because God will not deceive me.
René Descartes|There are two kinds of substance, interacting with each other: mind (which I am as a conscious being; ‘res cogitans’) and matter (‘res extensa’).
René Descartes|Unlike the body, the mind is indivisible; it is a unified and integral thing, and willing, sensing, understanding, etc. are not parts of it.
René Descartes|Some of our ‘ideas’ (e.g. God) are innate, some adventitious (sensations coming from external objects), and others inventions (e.g. hippogriffs).
René Descartes|Sense perception, imagination, and corporeal memory require the brain and the body but pure thinking arises from innate ideas in the intellect acting alone.
René Descartes|The sensations (‘ideas’) of light, hearing, tickling, pain, etc. formed in our minds bear no resemblance to the objects causing them.
René Descartes|Animals can act ‘in accordance with’ rules of reason, but they do not really act ‘for’ these reasons; they cannot apply these principles to novel circumstances.
René Descartes|The best explanation for the absence of speech in animals is the absence of thought; animals are nothing but mindless machines or automata.
Blaise Pascal|No matter how small the probability that God exists, as long as it is non-zero, the expected utility of theistic belief will dominate the expected utility of disbelief.
Blaise Pascal|No one without faith has ever reached happiness; the infinite abyss in us can be filled only with an infinite and immutable object, by God.
Blaise Pascal|It is the heart which experiences God, and not the reason.
Benedict Spinoza|To understand the world we should apply the methods of mathematics to reality.
Benedict Spinoza|If God is infinite, he cannot have boundaries; everything is part of God, all is one.
Benedict Spinoza|From a given determinate cause, the effect follows necessarily; and conversely, if there is no determinate cause, it is impossible for an effect to follow.
Benedict Spinoza|The totality of everything is the only thing that needs nothing outside itself in order to exist; it is the only true substance, it is God.
Benedict Spinoza|Many imagine God as a ruler, lawgiver, king, merciful, just etc. whereas these are attributes of human nature, not applicable to the divine nature.
Benedict Spinoza|Religious and scientific conceptions are two ways of describing the same reality.
Benedict Spinoza|Mind and matter are one and the same thing expressed in two ways, through different attributes.
Benedict Spinoza|Each thing strives to persevere in its being; nothing can be destroyed without the action of external causes.
Benedict Spinoza|All things are alive and have minds, in different degrees.
Benedict Spinoza|As God, or Nature, exists for the sake of no end, it also acts for the sake of no end.
Benedict Spinoza|Concepts like good, evil, order, confusion, warm, cold, beauty, ugliness do not indicate the nature of anything; they are products of the imagination.
Benedict Spinoza|We do not desire anything because we judge it to be good; we judge something to be good because we desire it.
Benedict Spinoza|Reason demands that everyone love themself, seek their own advantage and should strive to preserve their own being as far as they can.
Benedict Spinoza|There is no free will; the mind is determined to wish this or that by a cause, which has also been determined by another cause, ad infinitum.
Benedict Spinoza|Understanding that we are not free can liberate us, enabling us to come to terms with things as they are.
Benedict Spinoza|We should look at our lives through the eyes of eternity; our personal problems are insignificant in the totality of things.
Benedict Spinoza|Our desire to understand Nature (God) is the very essence of our minds, and this drive to understand also characterizes the good for us.
Benedict Spinoza|Although virtue is founded in rational self-interest, rational self-interest in turn urges us to desire the good of others.
Benedict Spinoza|The true aim of government is liberty, by enabling people to develop their minds and bodies in security.
Benedict Spinoza|Freedom of speech is necessary to secure the public order but seditious ideas are not to be tolerated by the sovereign.
Benedict Spinoza|Everyone is bound to submit to the state; reason bids us carry out even irrational orders because the alternative (living without a state) is worse.
Benedict Spinoza|The law against killing animals is based on superstition; reason dictates that we consider our own advantage and use them at our pleasure.
John Locke|The data from which we start to think should come through our senses, from the outside reality.
John Locke|When we are born the mind is like a blank slate on which experience begins to write.
John Locke|We should analyze our mental faculties and find out their limits; we cannot know everything.
John Locke|What we have direct experience of are the contents of our own consciousness (‘ideas’): sensory images, thoughts, feelings, memories, etc.
John Locke|We can only know the classificatory properties (‘nominal essence’) of a thing, not the material thing in itself (‘real essence’).
John Locke|Our ideas of “primary qualities” (length, weight, velocity, etc.) resemble those qualities and science can deal with these objective qualities.
John Locke|Our ideas of “secondary qualities” (taste, smell, colour, etc.) bear no resemblance to those qualities which are out of the reach of science.
John Locke|We passively acquire simple ideas from perception and sensation, and then actively combine them to generate complex ideas.
John Locke|I can only know the contents of my awareness, not the thing (self) that is having those experiences.
John Locke|Possible knowledge consists entirely of transactions between the mysterious subject and object.
John Locke|A person is a thinking intelligent being, that has reason and reflection, and can consider itself as itself in different times and places.
John Locke|Personal identity is a matter of psychological continuity (in terms of memory).
John Locke|Because knowledge/science starts from observation, there is always room for error.
John Locke|We must always be willing to change our beliefs in the light of changing evidence.
John Locke|It is mistaken and morally wrong for political and religious authorities to impose beliefs.
John Locke|Incogitative matter could never produce thought; there must be an eternal cogitative being, God, giving other knowing beings their powers.
John Locke|As made by God in His own image, human beings were not jungle beasts in the state of nature; God had given them reason and conscience.
John Locke|The social contract is made between free people because the presence of government is better.
John Locke|Sovereignty ultimately remains with the people; they retain their individual natural rights and the government has to secure those rights.
John Locke|People have three natural rights (independent of the laws of any particular society): the right to life, liberty, and property.
John Locke|If the government abuses people’s rights, they have the moral right to overthrow it.
John Locke|One can acquire the property of something by mixing one’s labour with it, but only where there is enough, and as good left in common for others.
John Locke|I can dispose of my property right as I wish; give it, sell it, etc., independently of government.
Anne Conway|There are three ‘species’: God, the source of all being; Christ, the ‘middle nature’; and ‘Creature’.
Anne Conway|A principle of likeness links God and creation; since God is good and just, his creation too is good and just.
Anne Conway|Created substance, like God, consists of spirit, but, unlike God, is constituted of particles (‘monads’).
Anne Conway|All created substance is living, capable of motion and perception; inert corporeal substance would contradict the nature of God, who is life itself.
Anne Conway|Created substance is differentiated from the divine, principally on account of its mutability and multiplicity.
Anne Conway|‘Middle nature’ (Christ) is an intermediary being (a bridge and a buffer) through which God communicates life, action, goodness and justice.
Anne Conway|All things are capable of becoming more spirit-like – more refined qua spiritual substance.
Anne Conway|All things are capable of increased goodness.
Anne Conway|Evil is a falling away from the perfection of God, and suffering is part of a longer term process of spiritual recovery.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|There are two kinds of truths: (necessary, analytic) truths of reasoning and (contingent) truths of fact.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|The sufficient reason for a truth of reasoning can be found by analysis, resolving it into simpler ideas and truths until we reach those which are primary.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|The reasons for a truth of fact are to be found by looking at other such facts; this analysis can be continued into greater detail without limit.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|The sufficient or ultimate reason for truths of fact must be outside of the sequence of these contingencies; it must be a necessary substance, God.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|If there is a reality in essences or in possibilities, or in the eternal truths, it must be based upon something existent and actual.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|God alone (or the Necessary Being) has this privilege that if he is possible he must necessarily exist.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|There is an infinite number of possible universes in the ideas of God, but only one of them can exist.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|God, as a perfect being, created the best possible universe with the greatest possible balance of good over evil.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|If you could step inside an enlarged conscious machine, you would find only mechanical parts, and never anything by which to explain perception.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|Everything, matter or mind, is made up of indivisible, partless, non-interacting, immaterial, mind-like centers of activity, ‘monads’.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|Bare monads (all monads in plants and inanimate objects; and subordinate monads in animal/human bodies) have unconscious perceptions.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|The central monads (‘souls’) of animals have perceptions that are distinct enough to give rise to memory, sensation, and consciousness (‘apperception’).
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|Some monads (God and the central monads of humans and angels; ‘minds’) are capable of self-consciousness and rational perceptions.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|All souls are created at the beginning of the world and are indestructible; they change their bodies only gradually and there is never perfect death.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|Every non-initial state of a monad (or ‘entelechy’) has as a real cause some previous state of that very monad, but not of other monads.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|Since monads cannot interact with each other, minds and their bodies do not causally interact.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|God does not act in the course of nature; it is against the laws of physics and it robs created things of all power and action.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|God actualized all monads at creation to stay in a pre-established harmony with each other; minds and bodies correspond without interaction.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|Since God discovered minds as parts of the best of all possible worlds and actualized them without changing their nature, their freedom is conserved.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|Since each monad is accommodated by God to every other monad, each is a mirror, a representation of the whole universe, its past and future.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|If two objects have exactly the same properties, then they are the same thing; indiscernibles are identical.
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz|Nature makes no leaps; nothing takes place suddenly.
George Berkeley|All we can ever apprehend are the contents of our own consciousness.
George Berkeley|We know that we exist because we have direct awareness of being a subject of experiences.
George Berkeley|An idea can be like nothing but an idea; our sensory images cannot be “copies” of external objects.
George Berkeley|We can never be sure that our experiences are attached to objects external to us.
George Berkeley|A consistent empiricism leads us to the conclusion that what exists are only minds and their contents.
George Berkeley|Total reality exists in God’s mind; things exist either in our minds or in God’s mind.
George Berkeley|Visible figures signify tangible figures but the connection between them is arbitrary (like words and objects), instituted by God’s language of nature.
George Berkeley|Our practice must be always shaped immediately by the rule that is framed with respect to the public good of mankind.
Francis Hutcheson|Besides their five external senses, humans have internal senses including a sense of beauty, of morality, of honour, and of the ridiculous.
Francis Hutcheson|Moral sense is our most important sense.
Francis Hutcheson|Moral sense is implanted in people, instinctively approving virtuous actions and disapproving the vicious ones.
Francis Hutcheson|In addition to the uncultivated “state of nature”, there is the cultivated state in which we are following our benevolent nature designed by God.
Francis Hutcheson|Wisdom denotes the pursuing of the best ends by the best means.
Francis Hutcheson|The action which procures the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers is the best.
Francis Hutcheson|Our rights are either alienable (rights to our goods and labours) or unalienable (rights to our life and liberty, to our private judgment).
Francis Hutcheson|No endowments, natural or acquired, can give a perfect right to assume power over others, without their consent; slavery is horridly unjust.
Francis Hutcheson|The foundation of aesthetic value lies in uniformity in variety.
David Hume|All our simple ideas (images in thinking) in their first appearance are derived (copied) from simple impressions (sensations, passions, and emotions).
David Hume|Nothing can ever be present to the mind but an image or perception (idea or impression); there is no immediate intercourse between the mind and the object.
David Hume|Ideas are faint and obscure compared to impressions; the creative power of the mind lies in the mixture of the materials afforded by the senses.
David Hume|The mind has a great propensity to spread itself on external objects, and to conjoin with them any internal impressions.
David Hume|Substance is a fiction: the imagination attaches something unknown and invisible to our collections of perceptions.
David Hume|When I enter into what I call ‘myself’, I always stumble on some particular perception or other; the self is nothing but a bundle of perceptions.
David Hume|Relations of ideas are intuitively or demonstratively certain but the contrary of every matter of fact is still possible; we cannot demonstrate their falsehood.
David Hume|Causal connection cannot be observed; all we experience is the constant conjunction of two events, without a necessary connection or power.
David Hume|A cause is an object precedent and contiguous to another, and so united with it, that the idea of the one determines the mind to form the idea of the other.
David Hume|The necessity in causal relationships is something that exists in the minds, not in objects; it depends on our inference, not the other way round.
David Hume|However many Xs I observe having the property or effect y, that is no proof that the next X I see will have the property or effect y.
David Hume|Custom is the great guide of human (and animal) life: the reliable but unproven, instinctual supposition that the future will be conformable to the past.
David Hume|There should be a degree of doubt, caution, and modesty in all kinds of scrutiny and decision.
David Hume|We have to act and reason and believe when we cannot secure the foundations of these operations; reason is and must be the slave of the passions.
David Hume|It is only (repeated) experience which can enable us to infer the existence of one object from that of another, including that of God.
David Hume|There is no observational evidence for the existence of God or the afterlife – only some inferential, indirect arguments (like the Argument from Design).
David Hume|There is no basis for inferring the existence of an infinitely powerful and good God in face of the contrary evidence of all the evil in this world.
David Hume|Religion is founded on faith, not on reason; it requires the subversion of all the principles of understanding, to believe what is contrary to experience.
David Hume|The idea of an infinitely superior deity sinks the human mind into the lowest submission and abasement, promoting mortification, penance, and passive suffering.
David Hume|Metaphysical claims which contain neither quantitative reasoning nor observational factual reasoning can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.
David Hume|Free will is simply the power of acting according to the determination of the will; everyone who is not a prisoner and in chains is free.
David Hume|The doctrines of necessity (as regularity of motives and actions) and of liberty are not only consistent with morality, but are essential to its support.
David Hume|Deductions of “ought” statements from “is” statements seem inconceivable; they need careful observation and explanation.
David Hume|Morals and aesthetics are not objects of reason and understanding but of taste and sentiment.
David Hume|Moral and aesthetic values cannot be addressed except in the context of a general theory about our shared human nature.
David Hume|Sentiments of moral approval and disapproval are caused by some of the operations of sympathy (empathy).
David Hume|Beauty is no quality in things themselves: it exists merely in the mind which contemplates them and each mind perceives a different beauty.
David Hume|Vulgar taste is more idiosyncratic and capricious; refined taste is more properly rule-governed, better informed, and stable.
David Hume|Standards of taste are constituted by the consensus of qualified (delicate, practiced, open, knowledgeable) judges over time and from multiple cultures.
David Hume|Animal behaviors resemble the human behaviors that are caused by associations among ideas, so animals have thought and reason.
Thomas Reid|To perceive an object is to be aware of it in a particular way and to be convinced that the object exists and is as it is conceived to be.
Thomas Reid|Visible figure is not a representational intermediary but a relational property between objects and our eyes, with a systematic variation with the tangible figure.
Thomas Reid|Sensations are like artificial signs (like words) for the qualities of objects: they lack any intrinsic connection with or resemblance to what they signify.
Thomas Reid|Our sensations function like a language that nature has constructed: their signification is the effect of our original constitution, instead of habit.
Thomas Reid|Skepticism is on the same footing as the common sense belief about external objects; reason and perception both depend on our constitution.
Thomas Reid|Shapes, sizes, and motions are intrinsic properties of objects while colors, sounds, and smells are relational properties of objects (with us).
Thomas Reid|Constant conjunction is neither necessary nor sufficient for the presence of a genuine law.
Thomas Reid|Genuine causation, ‘efficient causation’, is not reducible to physical causation; the rules of architecture never built a house.
Thomas Reid|An efficient cause is a being with a mind (with ‘moral liberty’) who has power to produce the effect, and exerts that power for that purpose.
Thomas Reid|People sometimes give in to their urges and sometimes act rationally against their urges; there are no laws linking motives with behavior.
Thomas Reid|I am not thought, I am not action, I am not feeling; I am something permanent that thinks, and acts, and suffers.
Thomas Reid|Language is the express image and picture of human thoughts, and from the picture we may draw some certain conclusions concerning the original.
Thomas Reid|Language is used to express judgments about all manners of topics; statements purporting to express ethical judgments are no exception.
Thomas Reid|The perception of duty by conscience resembles the perception of visible figures: they are both relational but their objects are mind-independent.
Thomas Reid|God has excellently fitted our conscience, common sense, reason, natural instincts, and bodily appetites to the benefit of the species.
Thomas Reid|A work, to be an artwork, must express the artist’s sentiments.
Thomas Reid|The beauty and sublimity of objects of sense is derived from the expression they exhibit of things intellectual, which alone have original beauty.
Thomas Reid|Universals are not abstract or general ideas, but general terms – the linguistic manifestation of general conceptions created by human minds.
Thomas Reid|General terms represent by convention; forming general conceptions is typically a public process and a product of social practices.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|Human beings in a state of nature are noble savages; they are born good, loving justice and order, acting on compassion in addition to self-interest.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|The origin of society, law, and property gave new powers to a few individuals and subjected the majority to perpetual labour, slavery, and wretchedness.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|Civilization corrupts people: social humans desire reputation, receiving the consciousness of their own existence merely from the judgment of others.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|We cannot return to the state of nature by renouncing the advances of our species; we must work to better our moral and political condition.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|When a group of people consider themselves as a single body (the sovereign), they have a single ‘general will’ also, always directed to the general welfare.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|What makes the will general is the common interest that unites people: everyone necessarily submits to the conditions that they impose on the others.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|To be driven by our appetites alone is slavery, while to obey a law that we have imposed on ourselves is freedom.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|No one has a natural authority over their fellows, and strength does not confer any right; the basis for all legitimate authority must be agreed convention.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|What one loses by the social contract is their natural freedom and an unlimited right to anything; what they gain is civil freedom and the right of property.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|People may be unequal in strength or intelligence, but with the social contract all become equal through agreed convention and by right.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|Equality, it is said, is a theorists’ vision, which cannot exist in practice; but if an abuse is inevitable, does it follow that it should not at least be controlled?
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|To properly ascertain the general will, there should be no partial society within the state, and each citizen should decide according to their own opinion.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|The general will and sovereignty cannot be represented (by deputies); any law that the people in person has not ratified is void, it is not a law.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|Individuals can see the good and reject it, the public desires the good and cannot see it; all equally need guides, talented legislators.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|Except for the original social contract which demands unanimous consent, a majority vote is always binding on all the citizens.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|Citizens owe the state everything that they can offer (including their life) whenever the sovereign asks for them for the good of the community.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|One who has control of people ought not to control the laws, and one who controls the laws ought not to control people.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|Legislative power can belong to the people alone; executive power belongs to the government, an intermediate body between subjects and sovereign.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|The act by which a government is instituted is not a contract, but a law; those with the executive power are not the masters of the people, but its officers.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|As the number of officers in the government increases, it becomes more rightful but less effective; larger states must have fewer officers (or monarchy).
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|Each citizen should have a religion which makes them cherish their social and moral duties but its dogmas do not concern the state or its members.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|Religion is a matter of the heart, not the head; emotions of awe and reverance should dominate instead of reason.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|Education should not repress or discipline a child’s natural tendencies (with rules and punishment); it should encourage their development.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau|The tools of education should not be books but practice and example: direct experience of people and of things.
Edmund Burke|Society is so big and complex that a single mind cannot possibly contain and understand it.
Edmund Burke|Society is like an organism living on its own, not a machine which can be built and modified at will.
Edmund Burke|The only realistic mode of political change is organic, not revolutionary.
Edmund Burke|Each generation inherits a treasure from the past which it is its duty to pass on.
Edmund Burke|Humans are imperfect creatures, therefore the idea of a perfect society is fantasy.
Edmund Burke|Governments have to deal with people as they are, extremely unequal in talent and ambition.
Edmund Burke|The public prospers more under practical-minded people than under clever theoreticians.
Edmund Burke|There is no use in discussing a person’s abstract (natural) right to food or to medicine; the question is upon the method of procuring and administering them.
Edmund Burke|Art creates a distanced context: we know that what we are seeing/reading does not actually endanger us, so delight replaces unpleasant emotions.
Edmund Burke|Great art seeks the infinite, which cannot be clear; it has the emotional pull and the distanced experience of the unknown, the sublime.
Immanuel Kant|What we can apprehend (perceive, feel, think, etc.) is limited by the capabilities of our sensory organs and brains.
Immanuel Kant|The contents of consciousness, produced by our bodily apparatus, are not the external objects; they are just limited representations.
Immanuel Kant|Our senses give us accurate information about the world, but they do so as gauges, not as pictures.
Immanuel Kant|The mode of existence of things-in-themselves (noumena) has nothing to do with our impressions (phenomena) of them.
Immanuel Kant|We have no means of access to the realm of things as they are (noumena).
Immanuel Kant|We make synthetic a priori judgements, based on our a priori forms of sensibility (space, time) and categories of understanding (quantity, quality, relation, modality).
Immanuel Kant|Space and time are forms of our sensibility, and causality is a category of our understanding; they are not original characteristics of things.
Immanuel Kant|There is no inner awareness of the self as an object but the “I think” must be able to accompany all my representations.
Immanuel Kant|It is impossible for any being to understand its own nature.
Immanuel Kant|Existence is not a property; it is a metaphysically necessary condition for the instantiation of any properties.
Immanuel Kant|We cannot know/prove the existence of God/souls because it is out of the limits of our senses.
Immanuel Kant|Science is the key to understand the world of material objects in space and time.
Immanuel Kant|If we are objects moving in space and time according to the scientific laws, we cannot have free will.
Immanuel Kant|The pursuit of happiness and its principles are variable, unpredictable, contingent; they cannot be the foundations of a necessary and universal moral law.
Immanuel Kant|You should act only according to maxims which you can will also to be universal laws; this is the categorical (unconditional) imperative.
Immanuel Kant|A will that is merely free from deterministic causation would be a will that acts randomly; a will that is free must also be guided by some principle.
Immanuel Kant|A will is autonomous if it is subject to the law of morality not because of an interest it has but because it has given the law to itself.
Immanuel Kant|A will bound by the moral law is a free will, and a free will must be a will that is also bound by the moral law, the categorical imperative.
Immanuel Kant|We know we are free because we are, undeniably, bound by the moral law: it forces itself upon us as a synthetic a priori proposition.
Immanuel Kant|Our empirical (phenomenal) self is bound by natural determinism but our rational self is free from such determinism.
Immanuel Kant|Morality is possible only for rational creatures having an a priori understanding of reasons for action and acting with a sense of duty instead of emotions.
Immanuel Kant|Because our wills are pulled away from autonomous willing by inclination and desire, we experience morality as a struggle, an obligation, an imperative.
Immanuel Kant|A human being (and every rational being) exists as an end in itself, not merely as a means for the discretionary use for this or that will.
Immanuel Kant|Punishment must be inflicted upon the criminal only because they have committed a crime, not because it will be useful to them or to society.
Immanuel Kant|Animals are not self-conscious and are there merely as a means to an end; that end is man.
Immanuel Kant|Taste is the faculty of judging of an object or a method of representing it by an entirely disinterested satisfaction (“beautiful”) or dissatisfaction.
Immanuel Kant|In all judgments by which we describe anything as beautiful, we allow no one to be of another opinion. (‘subjective universality’)
Immanuel Kant|Enlightenment is people’s emergence from their self-incurred immaturity – the inability, out of laziness and cowardice, to use one’s own understanding.
Immanuel Kant|It is more possible for the entire public to enlighten itself than for each individual; enlightenment is almost inevitable, if the public is left in freedom.
Immanuel Kant|A public can achieve enlightenment only slowly; a revolution may bring about the end of a despotism, but never a true reform in ways of thinking.
Immanuel Kant|Enlightenment only requires the freedom to use one’s own reason in addressing the reading public – this does not contradict obedience in civil posts.
William Paley|When we inspect a complex thing like a watch, we infer that it must have had a maker; similarly, organisms must have a designer, and that is God.
William Paley|Moral virtue is the doing good to humankind, in obedience to the will of God, and for the sake of everlasting happiness.
Jeremy Bentham|The rightness or wrongness of an action is determined by its consequences.
Jeremy Bentham|Good consequences of actions are those that give pleasure to someone (and bad – pain).
Jeremy Bentham|A right course of action is the one that maximizes the excess of pleasure over pain.
Jeremy Bentham|The greatest happiness of the greatest number is the foundation of morals and legislation.
Jeremy Bentham|Everybody is to count for one; and nobody for more than one.
Jeremy Bentham|There are no such things as natural rights – no such things as rights anterior to the establishment of government.
Jeremy Bentham|A goal and the chosen means to it are directly intentional; a known side effect is obliquely or collaterally intentional.
Jeremy Bentham|A law is an assemblage of signs declarative of a volition conceived or adopted by the sovereign in a state, concerning a course of conduct.
Jeremy Bentham|All punishment is mischief; punishment in itself is evil and it ought only to be admitted in as far as it promises to exclude some greater evil.
Jeremy Bentham|The purpose of punishment is deterrence, and it is only intentional actions that can be deterred, so it is only these that we should punish.
Jeremy Bentham|We are justified in painlessly killing animals for food or to protect ourselves; we are the better for it, and they are never the worse in terms of pain.
Jeremy Bentham|The law should protect any sensitive being from cruelty; the question is not “Can they reason?” nor “Can they talk?” but “Can they suffer?”.
Mary Wollstonecraft|Government and all human relations can be simplified, explicated, and rendered transparent.
Mary Wollstonecraft|God made all things right and the cause of all evil is man.
Mary Wollstonecraft|Rights entail duties; none could be expected to perform duties whose natural rights are not respected.
Mary Wollstonecraft|For a truly moral society, a complete change in the nature of the relationship between men and women is required.
Mary Wollstonecraft|Women are ill-prepared for their duties as social beings and imprisoned in a web of false expectations.
Mary Wollstonecraft|Women should be educated like men, to become rational and independent beings whose sense of worth doesn’t come from their appearance.
Mary Wollstonecraft|Women should be able to support themselves and their children, and never have to marry or remarry out of financial necessity.
Mary Wollstonecraft|Women should be granted civil and political rights; they should elect representatives of their own.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte|Scientific laws cannot be logically derived from empirical observations.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte|Empirical observations can be deduced from scientific laws.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte|The universe is the creation of the subject; it is derived from our ordered conception of it, in accordance with logical necessity.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte|We possess an immediate acquaintance with ourselves; the self exists and posits its own existence by virtue of merely existing.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte|We have experience of the existence of our selves, not in our capacity as knowing subjects but in our actions and decisions as moral agents.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte|The contradiction between the self and not-self can be resolved by positing a third concept (divisibility) which unites the two sides.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte|We know that we persist over time because we know that we bear moral responsibility for our actions.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte|The fundamental nature of all reality is moral; the empirical world is a field of reality that is not me through which I can exist as a moral agent.
Johann Gottlieb Fichte|Synthetic method to resolve a dialectically-generated contradiction: Thesis + Antithesis → Synthesis demonstrating their limits
Johann Gottlieb Fichte|What philosophy one chooses depends upon what kind of person one is; a philosophical system is animated by the soul of the person who has it.
Friedrich Schelling|Nature is a unity: it is not a state of affairs but an ongoing process which started with lifeless matter, evolving into plants, animals, and then humans.
Friedrich Schelling|We are part of Nature, not separate from or standing against it.
Friedrich Schelling|Our creativity is different from the rest of Nature’s creativity; it is self-aware as we explore the depths of our own being with our art.
Friedrich Schelling|Since we are part of Nature, in creative arts Nature is becoming self-aware.
Friedrich Schelling|The whole process of Nature is a development towards self-awareness.
Friedrich Schelling|Creative art is the summit of all existence, the raison d’être of reality.
Friedrich Schelling|The final desperate question: Why is there anything at all? Why not nothing?
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Being is only something in opposition to nothing, and they appear identical as no criterion can be invoked which differentiates them.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|The category of ‘becoming’ (transition from nothing to being) saves thinking from paralysis, accommodating being and nothing as negated moments.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Everything is the result of an intelligible (not arbitrary), dialectical process of change, and everything is changing.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Repeating dialectical process: Stage 1 + Opposition → Stage 2 (+ Opposition → Stage 3 ...)
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Even the apparently most immediate contents of consciousness are in fact mediated by the concepts with which they are grasped.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|One’s self-consciousness is dependent on one’s recognition of those others as similarly recognizing oneself as a self-conscious subject.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Complex patterns of mutual recognition constituting ‘objective spirit’ provide the social matrix within which individual self-consciousnesses exist.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|The subjective spirit and the objective spirit are parts of ‘Geist’ (or God), the Absolute Spirit – the ultimate essence of being, ‘I’ that is ‘We’ and ‘We’ that is ‘I’.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Reality is a historical process where Geist develops towards self-realization and self-consciousness through the actions of people, groups, and states.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Individuals feel alienated as they fail to understand the social and political structures that they create.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|We project perfect qualities on to God (omniscience, etc.) leading to alienation whereas we share the same spiritual existence.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|The self-determination of the bondsman through submission to the lord is incomplete because of the asymmetry in this relation.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|The bondsman objectifies himself through his labor, his transformed environment serving as a reflection of his self-realizing activity.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|When Geist will reach self-consciousness, alienations will end, everything will be harmonious, and change will stop (‘the Absolute’).
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|In the Absolute, everyone will work freely, serving the needs of the whole community rather than of masters, subject only to the discipline of reason.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|The perfected nation-state is the end/goal of history; it is a spiritual individual providing an optimal level of self-consciousness and rationality.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Religion supports the realization of Geist in the world and thus cannot have supremacy over or be opposed to the state.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Hereditary monarchy is the appropriate form of authority: strong central government along with a system of indirect representation through Estates.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Giving everyone an equal vote in large elections makes the outcome devoid of rational form, impersonal, contingent, and alienating.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|The economy, especially through the division of labor, produces fragmentation and diminishment of human life.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|The task of the state is not to thoroughly bureaucratize civil society but to provide rationality, oversight, regulation, and when necessary intervention.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Art is where consciousness of the Absolute first takes shape but modern religion and philosophy have passed beyond the limitations of art.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|Philosophy has no other object but God and so is essentially rational theology, more developed than the imagistic representational form of religion.
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel|The history of philosophy is the development of one philosophy, a necessary succession of stages, culminating in the self-consciousness of Geist.
Arthur Schopenhauer|Without time and space, there can be no differentiation; the noumenal reality cannot consist of things, it is one thing.
Arthur Schopenhauer|Causal connection can exist only within the phenomenal realm, therefore noumena cannot be the causes of phenomena.
Arthur Schopenhauer|The phenomenal is not a different reality from the noumenal but the same reality known in a different way.
Arthur Schopenhauer|Will and the bodily movements are the same events known in two different ways (from inside and from outside).
Arthur Schopenhauer|The purposeless energy, the unconscious impersonal ‘will’ (force) that we see in the physical events is what noumenal is.
Arthur Schopenhauer|In the phenomenal world, we seem to be separate individuals but ultimately we are one and undifferentiated in the noumenal.
Arthur Schopenhauer|The basis of morality and love is compassion; we are one in the noumenal and we share each other’s sufferings and joys.
Arthur Schopenhauer|The concept of a personal God is too anthropomorphic to be taken seriously.
Arthur Schopenhauer|The misery everywhere and the imperfection of humans cannot be reconciled with the existence of an all-wise, all-good, and all-powerful Being.
Arthur Schopenhauer|The concept of soul is useless; it supposes mind to be inseparably connected and yet independent of the organism.
Arthur Schopenhauer|Violence and injustice are rife in both the animal world and the human world; each individual lives a meaningless and purposeless tragedy, and dies.
Arthur Schopenhauer|The empirical world seems to be independent of ourselves, but in fact it is all subject-dependent – an illusion.
Arthur Schopenhauer|We should not be taken in by the empirical world; the end stage of philosophical understanding is the turning away of the human will from the world.
Arthur Schopenhauer|We are slaves to our desires, never fully satisfied; existence is suffering.
Arthur Schopenhauer|We can only escape existential suffering through aesthetic contemplation or asceticism.
Arthur Schopenhauer|The productions of genius (art, philosophy) serve no useful purpose; they alone exist for their own sake, they are the flower of existence.
Arthur Schopenhauer|Through arts we experience being taken out of time and space, and out of ourselves, and being in touch with something outside the empirical world.
Arthur Schopenhauer|Music transcends the other arts in metaphysical significance; through its abstractness we can enjoy being out of space and time.
Arthur Schopenhauer|Nature has furnished men and women with different attributes; their bodies and minds are adapted to their different roles in the propagation of the species.
Arthur Schopenhauer|Women are the second sex in many respects – childish, foolish, extravagant, short-sighted, weak, pretentious, cunning, and unaesthetic.
Arthur Schopenhauer|European social, civil, and political affairs would improve if women were socially and legally assigned their natural position as subordinates, like in Asia.
Ludwig Feuerbach|God is an imaginary representation of the human species-essence; theology is anthropology.
Ludwig Feuerbach|When human beings in the course of their history acquire new and different wishes, they worship new and different divinities.
Ludwig Feuerbach|Religion is an alienated form of human self-consciousness: it involves the relation of us to our own essence as though to a being distinct from ourselves.
Ludwig Feuerbach|Theological claims understood in the usual sense (referring to a non-human divine person) are self-contradictory.
Ludwig Feuerbach|To posit matter as God is to affirm atheism and materialism.
Ludwig Feuerbach|We need to renounce the theological essence of religion to affirm its true anthropological essence: the divinity of man.
Ludwig Feuerbach|The hidden “truth of Christianity” will finally be realized as an atheistic humanism which embraces the historical tasks of human self-realization.
Ludwig Feuerbach|Thought comes from being, but being does not come from thought.
Ludwig Feuerbach|I am a real, sensuous being and the body in its totality is my ego, my essence itself.
John Austin|The whole of our conduct should be guided by the principle of utility, insofar as it has not been determined by Revelation.
John Austin|An independent political society must be in a habit of obedience to a sovereign (person or group) which does not habitually obey anyone else.
John Austin|Laws are commands set by the sovereign, prescribing kinds of acts (not specific acts), clothed with legal sanctions.
John Austin|‘Positive law’ (set by the sovereign) differs both from the laws of God and from ‘positive morality’ (rules of conduct and conventional morality).
John Austin|The existence of law is one thing; its merit or demerit is another; a law, which actually exists, is a law, though we happen to dislike it.
John Stuart Mill|When we are considering our policies, we should seek the greatest happiness of the greatest number.
John Stuart Mill|Higher (mental, aesthetic, and moral) pleasures should be taken to be preferable (in kind, rather than by degree) to lower pleasures.
John Stuart Mill|To have a right is to have something which society ought to defend me in the possession of, for reasons of general utility.
John Stuart Mill|Human liberty comprises liberty of thought and feeling, liberty of tastes and pursuits, and liberty of combination among individuals.
John Stuart Mill|The only part of the conduct of any one, for which one is amenable to society, is that which harms others; over oneself, the individual is sovereign.
John Stuart Mill|There is no parity between the feeling of a person for their own opinion, and the feeling of another who is offended at their holding it.
John Stuart Mill|There ought to exist the fullest liberty of professing and discussing any doctrine, however immoral it may be considered.
John Stuart Mill|Our beliefs have no safeguard to rest on, but a standing invitation to the whole world to prove them unfounded; this is the amount of certainty attainable.
John Stuart Mill|Even a true opinion will lose its power/meaning and become a mere formal profession unless it is vigorously and earnestly contested.
John Stuart Mill|Having a true opinion in the mind as a prejudice, as a belief independent of argument, is not knowing the truth.
John Stuart Mill|The indulgence of hope with regard to the existence of God and the afterlife, while we recognize that we have no ground for more than a hope, is philosophically defensible.
John Stuart Mill|Different persons should be allowed to lead different lives (different experiments of living); whatever crushes individuality is despotism.
John Stuart Mill|It is important to give the freest scope possible to uncustomary things, in order that it may in time appear which of these are fit to be converted into customs.
John Stuart Mill|No community should be prevented from living under the laws they please, provided they commit no aggression on other nations, and allow freedom of departure.
John Stuart Mill|Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians, provided the end be their improvement.
John Stuart Mill|To produce children without a fair prospect of being able to provide for their physical and mental development is a crime against them and society.
John Stuart Mill|A general State education is a mere contrivance for moulding people to be exactly like one another, so as to please the predominant power.
John Stuart Mill|Ideal government: the greatest dissemination of power consistent with efficiency; the greatest centralisation of information, and diffusion of it from the center.
John Stuart Mill|The inequality of men and women is a relic from the past; it should be replaced by a system of perfect equality.
John Stuart Mill|What is now called the nature of women is an eminently artificial thing – the result of forced repression in some directions, unnatural stimulation in others.
John Stuart Mill|To ensure a truly exceptionless regularity (and the law of causality), we must include a large portion of the universe into the cause (the “whole cause”).
John Stuart Mill|With our mediated experience, we can have no warrant for believing in non-mental entities; matter is a permanent possibility of sensation.
John Stuart Mill|The sensation of color cannot be explained by any law of motion (of the particles in the body) even though there is correlation between the two.
John Stuart Mill|The basic principles of logic and mathematics are generalizations from experience rather than known a priori.
John Stuart Mill|There are no such things as numbers in the abstract; numbers are properties of aggregates and denote aggregates with those properties.
John Stuart Mill|Proper names are not connotative: they denote the individuals who are called by them without indicating any attributes as belonging to those individuals.
Charles Darwin|All the organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have descended from some one primordial form.
Charles Darwin|There is one general law in the evolution of organisms: multiply, vary, let the best adapted live and the worst adapted die. (‘natural selection’)
Charles Darwin|Although altruism gives little advantage to each individual over others in a group, a group of altruists would have an immense advantage over other groups.
Charles Darwin|The sufferings of millions of animals throughout almost endless time are irreconcilable with the idea of a God of unbounded benevolence.
Charles Darwin|It is hardly possible to define clearly what is meant by the organisation of a living thing being higher or lower.
Charles Darwin|‘Species’ is an artificial concept made for convenience; the search for the essence of the term ‘species’ is in vain.
Charles Darwin|The gradual formation of different languages is similar to that of species; the survival of favored words is natural selection.
Charles Darwin|The study of nature and humans will become far more interesting when we regard every production of nature as one which has had a history.
Søren Kierkegaard|We have to look at individual entities, not ideas and abstractions, to understand the world because that is all there is.
Søren Kierkegaard|The individual human being is the ultimate moral actor; our subjective, personal lives, our decisions are important.
Søren Kierkegaard|The attempt to make the state the highest ethical authority is an unethical flight from the category of individuality into that of the race.
Søren Kierkegaard|We build our lives and ourselves through the choices we make.
Søren Kierkegaard|The relationship of the individual soul to God is what matters most.
Søren Kierkegaard|Whoever learns to be anxious in the right way has learned the ultimate.
Søren Kierkegaard|The supreme paradox of all thought is the attempt to discover something that thought cannot think.
Karl Marx|Reality is a historical dialectical process operating with alienations.
Karl Marx|Only when alienations end will we be free and in control, as parts of an organic society instead of selfish individuals.
Karl Marx|The world and the dialectical process of change consist of material (not spiritual) forces; history is nothing but the activity of people pursuing their aims.
Karl Marx|The human essence is no abstraction inherent in each single individual; it is the ensemble of the social relations, and all social life is essentially practical.
Karl Marx|The defining characteristic of each individual is their relationship to the means of production; this gives rise to the existence of socio-economic classes.
Karl Marx|The dialectic works with the development of the means of production and the conflicts between socio-economic classes.
Karl Marx|The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas; the class which is the ruling material force of society, is its ruling intellectual force.
Karl Marx|Institutions, religions, philosophies, the arts, etc. (‘superstructure’) are determined by the economic base (‘substructure’).
Karl Marx|Religion is the opium of the people; to abolish religion as the illusory happiness of the people is to demand their real happiness.
Karl Marx|The Industrialist Capitalist society is the last stage before the end of history, of the dialectic.
Karl Marx|Unlike animals, humans produce even when they are free from physical need and truly produce only in freedom from such need, as conscious beings.
Karl Marx|Estranged labor (factories, division of labor, etc.) alienates the workers from the product, the process, the species-being, and themselves.
Karl Marx|When commodities are in the relation of exchange, their ‘exchange-value’ is something totally independent of their ‘use-value’.
Karl Marx|The capitalists exploit the workers by paying them less than the value of their labor and appropriate the ‘surplus-value’ thus created to make profit.
Karl Marx|Commodities appear as independent beings endowed with life, entering into relation both with one another and the human race. (‘commodity fetishism’)
Karl Marx|Private property has made us so stupid and one-sided that an object is only ours when we have (possess, eat, drink, wear, inhabit, etc.) it.
Karl Marx|It is inevitable that the workers will overthrow the capitalists and create a class-free society where the means of production belong to all.
Karl Marx|Philosophers have hitherto only interpreted the world in various ways; the point is to change it.
Franz Brentano|We have no experience of that which truly exists; physical phenomena (light, sound, heat, location, etc.) are only inadequate representations.
Franz Brentano|All phenomena, whether physical or mental, are appearances, objects of mental phenomena, “things of the mind”.
Franz Brentano|Every mental phenomenon is characterized by the intentional (or mental) inexistence of an object, and reference to a content, direction toward an object.
Franz Brentano|Intentionality is characteristic exclusively of mental phenomena; no physical phenomenon exhibits anything like it.
Franz Brentano|Every mental phenomenon is directed towards itself as a secondary object; inner perception makes us become aware of our mental phenomena.
Franz Brentano|Consciousness and intentionality are constitutively related, and cannot be treated in isolation from one another.
Franz Brentano|An object has ‘real existence’ when it is presented to us as it is in itself; only mental phenomena, in immediate inner perception, have real existence.
Franz Brentano|We can know truths about our mentality with certainty; psychology is a first-person empirical science.
Franz Brentano|Consciousness always forms a unity: we can only perceive one mental phenomenon at a specific point in time.
Franz Brentano|Inner observation (introspection) is impossible because it requires us to have two distinct acts in the same moment.
Franz Brentano|There cannot be unconscious mental phenomena, but only conscious mental phenomena of very low intensity.
Franz Brentano|There are three basic kinds of mental phenomena: presentations, judgments, and emotions.
Franz Brentano|Psychology contains the roots of aesthetics, logic, ethics, and politics, as ‘immediately evident’ judgments or emotions.
Charles Sanders Peirce|Knowledge is an activity: a process of doubt/need-to-know, evaluation, and understanding/explaining.
Charles Sanders Peirce|A full understanding of a concept must include the whole of the effects, which might have practical bearings, we conceive the concept to have.
Charles Sanders Peirce|The properties of things (e.g. a diamond’s hardness) cannot consist in anything but in their ‘behaviour’ in an agent’s interactions with them.
Charles Sanders Peirce|Knowledge is an instrument of survival in this world; we acquire it as participants, not as spectators.
Charles Sanders Peirce|The only way to take inquiry to its limit is through the adoption of a scientific method; philosophical questions remain within the realm of scientific inquiry.
Charles Sanders Peirce|The progress of science cannot go far except by collaboration; no mind can take one step without the aid of other minds.
Charles Sanders Peirce|Scientific activity isn’t adding new certainties to existing ones; it’s replacing old explanations with better ones.
Charles Sanders Peirce|The opinion which is fated to be ultimately agreed to by all who investigate is what we mean by truth, and the object represented in this opinion is the real.
Charles Sanders Peirce|Some of our mental faculties are not only localized in our brains but also in the tools we use; I cannot have a discussion without my inkstand.
Charles Sanders Peirce|‘Abduction’: The surprising fact, C, is observed; but if A were true, C would be a matter of course; hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.
Charles Sanders Peirce|An ‘Icon’ is a sign which refers to the object that it denotes merely by virtue of characters of its own.
Charles Sanders Peirce|An ‘Index’ is a sign which refers to the object that it denotes by virtue of being affected by that object.
Charles Sanders Peirce|A ‘Symbol’ is a sign which is constituted a sign merely or mainly by the fact that it is used and understood as such, whether the habit is natural or conventional.
Charles Sanders Peirce|A proper name, when one meets with it for the first time, works like an Index; with repeated acquaintance, it becomes an Icon and then a Symbol.
William James|Statements and theories that do all the jobs required of them (fit the known facts, generate insights/predictions, etc.) are true.
William James|If a statement cannot be disproved and a person benefits from believing in it, they are justified in doing so (e.g. religious beliefs).
William James|Before we invest much time or effort in seeking the meaning of anything, we should consider what practical difference it would make if we could find out.
William James|All thought is owned by some personal self.
William James|All thought is constantly in flux and never static; nevertheless, there is an ongoing continuity of thought for every thinker. (‘stream of consciousness’)
William James|New ideas are produced as accidental variations in the instable human brain and then selected by the person’s consciousness and the social environment.
William James|Introspective observation is what we have to rely on first and foremost in psychology; it is difficult and fallible but this is true of all kinds of observation.
William James|The only safeguard is in the final consensus of our farther knowledge, later views correcting earlier ones, until the harmony of a consistent system is reached.
William James|Our only intelligible notion of an object in itself is that it should be an object for itself; our physical perceptions are effects on us of ‘psychical’ realities.
William James|The notion of an all-encompassing Absolute Spirit undermines the values of human individuality, freedom, and responsibility.
William James|Four postulates of rationality are value-related, but unknowable, matters of belief: God, immortality, freedom, and moral duty.
William James|Realms of reality: objects of sense experience; science; philosophy & mathematics; illusion & prejudices; mythology & fiction; subjective opinions; madness.
William James|Determinism, though logically tenable, is pragmatically unacceptable: it trivializes evil and renders our natural reaction of regret pointless.
William James|Life can become worth living if we believe that it is and act on that belief, our commitment giving it meaning.
Friedrich Nietzsche|Concepts arise from the equation of unequal things, overlooking what is individual and actual; nature is acquainted with no forms and no concepts.
Friedrich Nietzsche|To be truthful means to employ the usual linguistic metaphors, to lie according to a convention which, after long usage, seems to be fixed, canonical, and binding.
Friedrich Nietzsche|The success of science in offering an objective picture is an illusion since science builds on our language and our representations of time, space, etc.
Friedrich Nietzsche|We cannot establish any fact ‘in itself’, there is only a “knowing” from a perspective; the more eyes we use, the more complete will be our “objectivity”.
Friedrich Nietzsche|We need to critique our moral values and fix their hierarchy, by considering their history and also using medical science.
Friedrich Nietzsche|The desire for free will and ultimate responsibility involves nothing less than to be self-caused, to pull oneself up into existence by the hair, out of nothingness.
Friedrich Nietzsche|There is no neutral substratum, no “being” behind doing, working, becoming; “the doer” is a mere appanage to the action.
Friedrich Nietzsche|The biological theory of “adaptation”, a second-class, mechanical, reactive activity, fails to realize the real essence of life, its activity, its will to power.
Friedrich Nietzsche|To talk of intrinsic right and wrong is nonsensical; life essentially functions by injuring, oppressing, exploiting, and annihilating.
Friedrich Nietzsche|Our success as a species was due to the perpetual elimination of the weak, incompetent, and stupid by the strong, competent, and clever.
Friedrich Nietzsche|The origin of the “State” lies in conquerors and masters dominating populations, not in contracts.
Friedrich Nietzsche|Language can be seen as the expression of the power of the masters; they seal every object and event with a sound, and thereby take possession of it.
Friedrich Nietzsche|The Judeo-Christian tradition created a slave-morality based on resentment, pity, guilt, and self-denial, exalting the weak and stigmatizing the strong.
Friedrich Nietzsche|The aristocratic morality acts independently (with the concepts “good” and “bad”); the slave-morality requires an external world with “evil” to react to.
Friedrich Nietzsche|The obstructed and inverted cruelty of civilized humans invented the bad conscience so as to torture themselves with the thought of owing something to God.
Friedrich Nietzsche|The bad conscience turns against the origin of the human race (original sin), Nature (its diabolization), or existence generally (Nihilism, Buddhism).
Friedrich Nietzsche|The ascetic ideal has dominated all philosophy and science, because Truth was fixed as Being, as God, because Truth was not allowed to be a problem.
Friedrich Nietzsche|When the belief in the God of the ascetic ideal is repudiated, the problem of the value of truth arises, even for science, atheism, and morality.
Friedrich Nietzsche|We should embrace an ethics of life-assertion; “good” and “true” are things that are on the side of life and fulfilment, not self-restraint.
Friedrich Nietzsche|Art is a saving enchantress, offering the sublime as the artistic subjugation of the awful, and the comic as the artistic delivery from the nausea of the absurd.
Friedrich Nietzsche|We must become human beings who are new, unique, incomparable, who give themselves (non-“universal”) laws, who create themselves.
Friedrich Nietzsche|Everything that has happened will happen again in cosmic epicycles of time; this can give motivation to live more fulfilling lives.
Francis Herbert Bradley|The aim of morality is self-realization – pursuing to realize one’s ideal self in every situation.
Francis Herbert Bradley|The importance of happiness as the point of morality can be retained but the means by which happiness is attained are also important.
Francis Herbert Bradley|The concept of duties in morality can be retained if their obligatoriness arises from the nature of each duty rather than from some formal principle.
Francis Herbert Bradley|Realization of the ideal self is unattainable through morality because morality depends on the existence of evil, but it could be possible in religion.
Francis Herbert Bradley|The ideas by which we try to understand the universe (cause, motion, self, space, time, etc.) lead to contradictions in their implications.
Francis Herbert Bradley|The notion of the thing-in-itself is self-contradictory; if we really know nothing about it, then we do not even know that it exists.
Francis Herbert Bradley|If a relation were a further kind of real thing along with its terms, then a further relation would be required to relate it to its terms, and so on ad infinitum.
Francis Herbert Bradley|Relations exist only in and through a whole which cannot in the end be resolved into relations and terms.
Francis Herbert Bradley|The impression of reality’s consisting of a multiplicity of related objects is a result of the separations imposed by thought.
Francis Herbert Bradley|The final truth is identical with the whole of reality; it transcends thought and logical categories altogether, it is inexpressible.
Francis Herbert Bradley|Reality is one; its contents are nothing but sentient experience, and it is a single and all-inclusive experience, embracing every partial diversity.
Francis Herbert Bradley|The Absolute articulates itself in a plurality of lesser sentient wholes, finite centres of experience, coordinated as parts of the overarching Reality.
Francis Herbert Bradley|Reality itself admits of degrees: the more a phenomenon is a fragmentary aspect of the whole, the less real it is.
Francis Herbert Bradley|The Absolute transcends good and evil, and religion – it is in a sense a Supreme Being, but not a personal God.
Gottlob Frege|Logic is independent of human thought; it is a normative science whose laws prescribe universally how one should think.
Gottlob Frege|Mathematical truths are not empirical truths and numbers cannot be properties of aggregates of objects.
Gottlob Frege|Arithmetics can be derived from logic.
Gottlob Frege|Numbers can be construed as sets.
Gottlob Frege|The ‘reference’ of an expression is the actual thing corresponding to it – its truth value if it is a proposition.
Gottlob Frege|The ‘sense’ of an expression is the ‘mode of presentation’ by which one conceives of the reference, whether or not it exists.
Gottlob Frege|Expressions with different senses can have the same reference.
Gottlob Frege|A thought is something for which the question of truth arises; it is the ‘sense’ of a declarative sentence.
Gottlob Frege|Thoughts are immaterial and timeless – neither things of the outer world nor subjective ideas (they need no bearer); a third realm must be recognized.
Gottlob Frege|Thoughts are apprehended by thinkers and bring about changes in the inner and outer world; thinkers do not create the thoughts.
Gottlob Frege|Only in the context of a sentence do words have any meaning.
Gottlob Frege|“I see blue” has the same content as “It is true that I see blue”; nothing is added to the thought by my ascribing to it the property of truth.
Gottlob Frege|“Do I see the same colors as you do?” is an unanswerable, nonsensical question; color terms characterize sense-impressions belonging to one’s consciousness.
Henri Poincaré|The principle of complete induction, which is not provable via analytical inferences, is a genuine synthetic a priori judgment.
Henri Poincaré|Arithmetic cannot be reduced to logic (which is analytic); it is a synthetic science whose objects are not independent from human thought.
Henri Poincaré|Mathematicians can use the methods of logic to check a proof, but they must use intuition to create a proof.
Henri Poincaré|The creative combinations of ideas are formed randomly in the subliminal ego and those that are harmonious become conscious.
Henri Poincaré|Although scientific theories (and geometries) deal with the same reality, each has its own language or syntax, which is chosen by convention.
Henri Poincaré|There is an objective, non-conventional criterion to judge the soundness of a scientific theory: the accuracy of its predictions.
Henri Poincaré|Laws are like smooth interpolated curves missing some of the data points; a scientific theory is not directly falsifiable by the experience alone.
Henri Poincaré|Hypotheses which have the maximum scope, common to all scientific theories, are the last to be changed.
Henri Poincaré|Seeing scientific theories abandoned one after the other, one may predict that the theories in fashion today will in a short time succumb in their turn.
Henri Poincaré|Objects in scientific theories are merely names of the images we substituted for the real objects which Nature will hide forever from our eyes.
Henri Poincaré|Relations between objects, expressed by equations in scientific theories, remain true in theory-changes; they are the only reality we can attain.
Sigmund Freud|There is a dynamic unconscious part of the mind which exerts pressures and influences on what we do and say.
Sigmund Freud|The ‘unconscious’ is different from the ‘preconscious’ (some memories, facts, etc.) which can become conscious.
Sigmund Freud|The human mind has three structural systems: the ‘id’ (instincts), the ‘ego’ (the reconciler), and the ‘super-ego’ (conscience).
Sigmund Freud|All the “energy” in our minds comes from the instincts alone.
Sigmund Freud|The ‘Life’ instinct (Eros) contains erotic and self-preservative instincts; the ‘Death’ instinct (Thanatos) contains sadism, aggression, self-harm, etc.
Sigmund Freud|Our adult characters are determined by our early childhood experiences which have many sexual (body-pleasure-related) elements.
Sigmund Freud|The little boy has a desire for his mother and a fear of castration by his father (Oedipus complex); the little girl develops penis envy.
Sigmund Freud|When we repress our inner conflicts, they continue to exist in the unconscious and create neurotic symptoms.
Sigmund Freud|Neurosis can sometimes be treated with psychoanalysis: a process that brings back the repressed material into consciousness.
Sigmund Freud|Our whole civilized life might be neurotic because of the sacrifice of instinctual satisfaction.
Sigmund Freud|The teachings of religion are illusions, fulfillments of our oldest and strongest wishes; just as they are unverifiable, they are also irrefutable.
Sigmund Freud|To use private judgement about religious arguments would be a wanton undertaking; such questions are too significant for that.
Sigmund Freud|The God that many philosophers define is no more than an insubstantial shadow, no longer the mighty figure of religious teaching.
Sigmund Freud|The truths contained in religion are so distorted and symbolically disguised that most people are incapable of recognizing them as truth.
Sigmund Freud|Our mental apparatus was in fact developed in the effort to map the outside world, so must have a certain amount of expediency in its structure.
Sigmund Freud|The individuals are the mortal vehicles of a possibly immortal substance (the germ-plasm), only the temporary holders of an estate which survives them.
Sigmund Freud|Artists turn their fantasies and repressed unconscious desires into objects that the rest of us enjoy because we share those fantasies and desires.
Ferdinand de Saussure|A language (‘langue’) is the virtual system possessed by all those who form part of the same speech community.
Ferdinand de Saussure|‘La parole’ is the utterances, the texts, that individuals produce and understand making use of the system that is ‘la langue’.
Ferdinand de Saussure|It is not things, but our conception of things, that are part of our language: schemas in the brain being evoked by certain combinations of sounds.
Ferdinand de Saussure|A language is a system of signs, each composed of two entirely mental values: ‘signifier’ (sound pattern) and ‘signified’ (concept).
Ferdinand de Saussure|Each signifier and each signified is a value produced by the difference between it and all the other signifiers and signifieds in the system.
Ferdinand de Saussure|The conjunction of signifier and signified is a sign which is of a positive order, and is concrete rather than abstract.
Ferdinand de Saussure|Every word or term or unit within the system is connected to an entourage of other units; no linguistic sign exists in isolation.
Ferdinand de Saussure|The link between a signifier and a signified is radically arbitrary; there is no logical connection between them.
Ferdinand de Saussure|Every element of a language is subject to change, to evolution, but no individual can change it.
Ferdinand de Saussure|Both the mutability and the immutability of language result from the arbitrariness of the sign.
Ferdinand de Saussure|Before language, human thought was an amorphous, indistinct, nebulous mass, a floating realm; and human sound was no different.
Ferdinand de Saussure|Language and writing are two distinct systems of signs; the second exists for the sole purpose of representing the first.
Edmund Husserl|The one thing that exists for sure is our consciousness; we should start from there to build our picture of reality.
Edmund Husserl|My awareness is of objects – not of myself having experiences of objects.
Edmund Husserl|We should bracket the questions about the independent existence of the objects that we perceive (‘epokhe’) and investigate them as objects of consciousness.
Edmund Husserl|We should bracket considerations concerning the contingent and accidental, and concentrate on the essences (‘eide’) of the objects and acts of consciousness.
Edmund Husserl|We have a passive phenomenological process based on our interactions with things and a linguistically/conceptually mediated active one.
Edmund Husserl|Perception is founded on a pattern of counterfactual sensori-motor relationships between our current sensory experience and our immanent anticipations.
Edmund Husserl|The totality of my perceptual expectations forms a ‘horizon’ of understanding, which is updated when expectations are frustrated.
Edmund Husserl|Non-intentional sensations (‘hyle’) and the perceptual (interpretive) sense can vary independently: one can change while the other remains the same.
Edmund Husserl|The lived body is the locus of directly felt sensations and is capable of self-movement, opening a rich range of practical possibilities (“I can”s).
Edmund Husserl|Intersubjective (empathic) experience occurs when we consciously attribute intentional acts to other subjects.
Edmund Husserl|In intersubjective experience, I must presuppose that the objects forming my own world exist independently of my subjective perspective.
Edmund Husserl|Intersubjectivity is crucial in our constitution of ourselves as objectively existing subjects, other subjects, and the objective world.
Edmund Husserl|The present must contain a ‘retention’ of the immediate past and a ‘protention’ of the immediate future, or else it would disappear into nothing.
Edmund Husserl|The foundations of logic can be clarified with the help of psychology.
Edmund Husserl|Laws of logic are a priori, they are justified by apodictic self-evidence, and valid rather than probable; they are not psychological.
Henri Bergson|Human beings should be explained from the perspective of evolution.
Henri Bergson|Life is like a current passing from germ to germ through the medium of an organism which is like an excrescence.
Henri Bergson|Our senses do not give us objective representations; they stimulate behavior for survival.
Henri Bergson|Evolution is directed by a drive (‘élan vital’) towards greater individuality and complexity.
Henri Bergson|Everything changes; the flow of time is fundamental to reality, to life.
Henri Bergson|We have direct intuitive experience of time, independent of conceptual thinking and sensual input.
Henri Bergson|We know we have free will because we have direct intuitive knowledge about our decisions to act.
Henri Bergson|Our intellect artificially breaks up time and space into manageable units to handle them – very useful for everyday life, business, and science.
Henri Bergson|The partitioning of the world does not show us reality; real time (‘duration’) and space are continuous and irreducible.
Henri Bergson|The present contains nothing more than the past; without the survival of the past into the present there would be no duration, but only instantaneity.
Henri Bergson|We live in two worlds: our inner experience of the continuum, and our intellect’s partitioning.
John Dewey|Knowledge is an adaptive human response to environing conditions, with practical instrumentality in the control of that interaction.
John Dewey|Hands and feet, apparatus and appliances are as much a part of thinking as changes in the brain: what matters is what they do, not what they are made of.
John Dewey|Scientific knowledge is the most reliable and useful type of knowledge.
John Dewey|‘Warranted assertibility’ is a better way of capturing the function of both knowledge and truth insofar as both are goals of inquiry.
John Dewey|There is no fundamental fact/value distinction; nature embraces all aspects of life, including values.
John Dewey|The worse or evil is a rejected good: in deliberation and before choice no evil presents itself as evil – until it is rejected, it is a competing good.
John Dewey|The problem-solving approach of the scientific method should be the pattern for all other types of enquiry.
John Dewey|The scientific method is a social activity because it requires criticism.
John Dewey|The education of children should be based on the problem-solving approach (‘learning by doing’).
John Dewey|A beautiful object is not art if there is no artist who made it; art is a product of a creative process involving intentional actions and desires.
John Dewey|Having an ‘experience’ is different from just being alive; an experience is a coherent and structured unit of features of our interactions with the world.
John Dewey|Artists provide us with ‘experiences’ by producing coherent and structured objects/events that bring together various aspects of disjoint perceptions.
Pierre Duhem|A theory of physics is not an explanation; it is a system of mathematical propositions to represent as simply as possible a group of experimental laws.
Pierre Duhem|The highest test of a theory is to ask it to indicate in advance things which the future alone will reveal.
Pierre Duhem|When a theory is successful, it means that the relations established by our reason among abstract notions only correspond to the relations among things.
Pierre Duhem|Scientific hypotheses only work given further auxiliary hypotheses, some of which are about the experimental equipment.
Pierre Duhem|When a prediction fails, the scientist may reconsider the theoretical postulates or check the equipment.
Pierre Duhem|Observations and experiments cannot be by themselves decisive in refuting scientific hypotheses.
Pierre Duhem|Scientists choose among competing theories by eliminative reasoning; this can only be reliable if there is the true one among the alternatives.
Pierre Duhem|What we can ever have is an imperfect and provisional theory with innumerable groupings, hesitations, and repentances.
Pierre Duhem|It is hard for scientists from different schools or time periods to understand each other and have meaningful discussions; they speak different languages.
Pierre Duhem|Metaphysical/religious doctrines touch on objective reality, whereas physical theories use mathematical signs stripped of all objective existence.
Pierre Duhem|Since metaphysical/religious doctrines and physical theories do not have any common term, they can neither contradict nor agree with each other.
George Santayana|Knowledge is composed of instances of awareness that in themselves do not contain the prerequisites for knowledge (e.g. concepts, universals, essences).
George Santayana|Philosophy must begin in the middle of things, in action itself, where there is an instinctive and arational belief in the natural world: ‘animal faith’.
George Santayana|Ancient conditions of life on Earth determined which ‘psyches’ (natural structures of physical bodies) should arise and prosper.
George Santayana|There are certain inevitable beliefs; they are inescapable given nature and our physical history (e.g. belief in external objects, inductive reasoning).
George Santayana|The four realms of being are ‘essence’, ‘matter’, ‘truth’, and ‘spirit’; these are the qualities of reality and they are irreducibly different.
George Santayana|An ‘essence’ is a universal, an object of thought, not a material force; ‘matter’ remains as the origin of existence and the arena of action.
George Santayana|All conscious beings must ascertain belief about ‘truth’ based on the success of actions that sustain life and permit periods of delight and joy.
George Santayana|The nature of truth is correspondence with what is but the test of truth is pragmatic because of the limits of our nature.
George Santayana|‘Spirit’, or consciousness, is momentary, fleeting, and depends on our physical bodies; it is a result and not a cause, a comment and not an agent.
George Santayana|Ethical statements cannot be true or false like scientific statements; they are only expressions of preferences we feel.
George Santayana|There is no one good for all, or even for an individual; it depends on our nature and the circumstances, and in different times and environments.
George Santayana|Self-knowledge is the distinguishing moral mark; the extent to which one knows one’s interests will determine whether one can achieve a good life.
John Ellis McTaggart|While science may investigate the nature of the universe, only philosophy investigates its ‘ultimate nature’.
John Ellis McTaggart|The universe contains multiple substances, dissimilar to each other; they admit of exclusive, sufficient descriptions.
John Ellis McTaggart|Substances are infinitely divisible into parts unlike their wholes which are also substances; ‘simple’ partless substances are not possible.
John Ellis McTaggart|Because any two substances compose a further compound substance, the universe is a single substance composed of all other substances.
John Ellis McTaggart|Instead of deducing a sufficient description of a substance in virtue of its parts, we should be deducing descriptions of the parts in virtue of the whole.
John Ellis McTaggart|The only way the nature of substance could comply with whole-to-part descriptions is if substance is spirit, not matter.
John Ellis McTaggart|The primary parts of the universe are selves, and the secondary parts their perceptions which are differentiated to infinity.
John Ellis McTaggart|The reality of time requires the temporary (not permanent) properties of being past, present, and future.
John Ellis McTaggart|Past, present, and future are incompatible determinations; every event must be one or the other, but no event can be more than one.
John Ellis McTaggart|Every event has all three characteristics of being past, present, and future; if it is present, it has been future and will be past, etc.
John Ellis McTaggart|Time cannot exist; it is not real.
Benedetto Croce|All but only lived human experience, taking place concretely and without reduction, is real.
Benedetto Croce|We cannot determine the boundary between the present and the past; history represents the only all-encompassing account of reality.
Benedetto Croce|Mental activity is either theoretic (aesthetic or logic) or practical (economic or ethical).
Benedetto Croce|The aesthetic deals in particulars (individuals or intuitions) whereas logic deals in concepts and relations, or universals.
Benedetto Croce|The intellect presupposes the intuitive (aesthetic) mode but the intuitive mode does not presuppose the intellect and concepts.
Benedetto Croce|The intuition is an organic whole; to analyze it into atoms is always a false abstraction.
Benedetto Croce|Science and mathematics use pseudo-concepts postulated for convenience; ‘empirical laws’ are not fit subjects for truth and knowledge.
Benedetto Croce|Art is everywhere, and the difference between ordinary intuition and that of “works of art” is only a quantitative difference.
Benedetto Croce|To intuit is to express; works of art are mental objects, and spectators (and critics) are actually recreating them in their minds.
Benedetto Croce|The technical, physical manifestation (the painting of pictures, etc.) is only contingently related to the work of art, that is, to the expressed intuition.
Benedetto Croce|Expression and beauty are not two concepts: beauty is nothing but the precision of the image, an appropriate expression is also beautiful.
Benedetto Croce|At the aesthetic level, there is no identification of content independently of the form, and none of form independently of content.
Benedetto Croce|Aesthetic pleasures and pains exist, but they are the practical echo of aesthetic value and disvalue, not the aim of art.
Benedetto Croce|In having an intuition, one succeeds entirely insofar as aesthetic value is concerned; there cannot be a real question of a ‘standard’ of beauty.
Benedetto Croce|The variability in critical verdicts in art is largely due to variances in the psychological conditions and the physical circumstances of spectators.
Benedetto Croce|Works of art only produce effects upon souls prepared to receive them; natural signs do not exist, all are conventional – historically conditioned.
Benedetto Croce|Drawing, sculpting, writing of music and so on are just as much ‘language’ as poetry, and all language is poetic.
Benedetto Croce|Expression is an indivisible whole: noun and verb are abstractions made by us, destroying the sole linguistic reality, which is the sentence.
Clive Bell|What matters aesthetically cannot be the content of a work of art; two works with the same content can be aesthetically very different.
Clive Bell|The ‘significant form’ composed of formal qualities (lines and colors) that elicit emotional response is the most important element in works of art.
Clive Bell|To appreciate a work of art we need bring with us nothing from life, no knowledge of its ideas and affairs, no familiarity with its emotions.
Clive Bell|Art transports us from the world of human activity to a world of aesthetic exaltation; for a moment we are lifted above the stream of life.
Hans Kelsen|The law is created by acts of human beings; it is independent of morality and similar norm systems based on the “will of nature” or “pure reason”.
Hans Kelsen|The law is basically a scheme of interpretation: we attach a legal-normative meaning to certain actions and events in the world.
Hans Kelsen|An act or an event gains its legal-normative meaning by another legal norm that confers this normative meaning on it.
Hans Kelsen|To get an “ought” type of conclusion from a set of “is” premises, one must point to some “ought” premise in the background.
Hans Kelsen|In every legal system, hierarchical derivations of validity must come to an end at a ‘basic norm’ that is presupposed to be legally valid.
Hans Kelsen|Every two norms that ultimately derive their validity from one basic norm belong to the same legal system.
Hans Kelsen|A norm can only be legally valid if it belongs to a system that is efficacious, i.e. by and large actually practiced by a certain population.
Hans Kelsen|A basic norm is legally valid if and only if it is actually followed in a given population; a successful revolution can change its content.
Hans Kelsen|Every type of “ought”, be it religious, moral or legal, must presuppose a certain point of view which is constituted by a basic norm.
George Edward Moore|We are more certain of the truth of everyday things (‘common sense’) than we are of the general grounds for doubt introduced by sceptics.
George Edward Moore|We can regard the unbelievable conclusions of sceptical arguments as reasons for rejecting their premises.
George Edward Moore|To have a sensation is already to be outside the circle of our own ideas and sensations; it is to know something which is not a part of my experience.
George Edward Moore|‘Sense-data’ (colors, sounds, etc. of which we are very often directly conscious) stand in a representational relation to physical objects.
George Edward Moore|One can understand, and know the truth of, various ‘common sense’ propositions even if one cannot give the analysis of them.
George Edward Moore|One could not judge the correctness of an analysis of a proposition if one did not understand the proposition in the first place.
George Edward Moore|Moral concepts (e.g. goodness) are neither reducible to nor derivable from non-moral (scientific or metaphysical) judgements. (‘naturalistic fallacy’)
George Edward Moore|Morality presupposes the existence of an irreducible domain of distinctive and objective facts about the intrinsic value of different things.
George Edward Moore|Ethical knowledge rests on a capacity for an intuitive grasp of fundamental ethical truths.
George Edward Moore|What is right is always what most promotes the good.
George Edward Moore|The idea of ‘my own good’, what is ‘good for me’, makes no sense: nothing is added by saying that the pleasure constitutes my good, or is good for me.
George Edward Moore|Ethical egoism (“Each person’s happiness is the sole good”) is contradictory; a number of different things cannot each of them be the sole good.
Bertrand Russell|Mathematical and logical truths must be true unconditionally; 2 + 2 equals 4 even if there are no intelligences or minds to think it.
Bertrand Russell|Mathematics can be derived from logic.
Bertrand Russell|Naïve set theory is paradoxical: the set of all sets that are not members of themselves is and is not a member of itself.
Bertrand Russell|Epistemology is distinct from psychology; a belief is true when there is a corresponding fact, and is false when there is no corresponding fact.
Bertrand Russell|A true belief is not knowledge when it is deduced from a false belief or a fallacious process of reasoning.
Bertrand Russell|All words that possess meaning do so by denoting complex or simple, abstract or concrete objects.
Bertrand Russell|There are particulars (objects, etc.) existing in only one place at a time, and universals (qualities, relations, etc.) existing in more than one place at a time.
Bertrand Russell|We infer the existence of physical objects from what we are directly acquainted with, our sense data.
Bertrand Russell|Transitive and asymmetrical relations are irreducible to properties of terms, as the quality of imposing order among terms is lost.
Bertrand Russell|Since relations are external to terms, reality is composed of diverse entities, bound but not dissolved into wholes by external relations.
Bertrand Russell|All that physics gives us is certain equations giving abstract properties of their changes, but as to what it is that changes, physics is silent.
Bertrand Russell|The world consists of a complex of logical atoms and their properties and relations, forming the atomic facts which, in turn, form logically complex objects.
Bertrand Russell|Inferred entities (e.g. physical objects) are in fact logical constructions (fictions) formed from the sense data (improved by science).
Bertrand Russell|Analysis results in a logically perfect language consisting only of words that denote sense data, universals, and logical constants (words like “or” and “not”).
Bertrand Russell|A sentence can be meaningful (and true/false) even if a description in it fails to describe anything, and ordinary proper names are disguised descriptions.
Bertrand Russell|The world consists of just one neutral type of substance which is neither exclusively mental nor exclusively physical.
Bertrand Russell|The sensation we have when we see a patch of colour simply is that patch of colour; and since sensations are not intentional, they are non-mental.
Bertrand Russell|Things are bundles of co-existing properties; there is not a substratum as an unknowable ‘this’ distinct from and underlying its properties.
Bertrand Russell|Empiricism uses principles of reason that cannot be proved by experience; induction involves a non-empirical logical principle, known a priori.
Bertrand Russell|The notion of causation is a relic of a bygone age; scientific formulas make no difference between past and future and no reference to causes and effects.
Bertrand Russell|Vagueness is a matter of representation (language); it is a mistake to attribute vagueness to the world simply because our language is vague.
Bertrand Russell|Desires, emotions or passions are the only possible causes of action; reason is not a cause of action but only a regulator.
Bertrand Russell|Ethical knowledge is not possible and ethical statements are not fact-stating; they are optative or desire expressing.
Bertrand Russell|A great deal of harm is caused by the belief in the virtuousness of work; the road to happiness lies in an organized diminution of work.
Arthur Eddington|Science has nothing to say about the intrinsic nature of matter; our knowledge in physics consists solely of readings of pointers on instruments.
Arthur Eddington|The sort of thing we know in science is structure of the kind defined and investigated in the mathematical theory of groups.
Arthur Eddington|Mind is the first and most direct thing in our experience, and all else is remote inference.
Arthur Eddington|It seems rather silly to prefer to postulate something of a “concrete” nature inconsistent with thought, and then to wonder where thought comes from.
Arthur Eddington|Consciousness is not sharply defined, but fades into subconsciousness; and beyond that we must postulate something continuous with our mental nature.
Arthur Eddington|The universe is of the nature of a thought or sensation in a universal Mind; the stuff of the world is mind-stuff.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|We cannot even talk about the part of reality beyond our experience – that talk becomes nonsense.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|The sense of the world must lie outside the world – in the world everything is as it is, and everything happens as it does happen, accidentally: in it no value exists.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Our understanding of the world is based on language; the limits of language define the limits of our conception.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Language is like a picture, describing reality by having the same logical form with it.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Language is a multifunctional tool; meaning depends on the context and the function being served (describing, ordering, asking, etc.).
Ludwig Wittgenstein|The meaning(s) of a word lacks essences and boundaries; it is a network of similarities, ‘family resemblances’, overlapping and criss-crossing.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Language is a public, social thing, getting its meanings from rule-based ‘language-games’; there can be no private language.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Much of philosophy consist of conceptual confusions due to misuse of language; the philosopher’s job should be to eliminate them by an analysis of language.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Since one cannot be mistaken or in doubt about one’s own sensations, one cannot really say that one knows of one’s own sensations either.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Mental vocabulary is not descriptive: the verbal expression of pain does not describe the pain, it is a learned pain-behavior which replaces crying.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|What I think is what I can declare to be my thought and what can manifest itself in my behaviour – not the words/images going through my mind.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Understanding cannot be identified with a state or a process in the mind; it is a capacity.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Words like ‘voluntary’ or ‘willing’ do not stand for some distinctive mental occurrence that must precede or accompany a movement for it to be voluntary.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Our common-sense understanding provides the context within which doubts are possible; scepticism is self-undermining.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Philosophy has nothing to contribute at the level of empirical problems; they are to be solved by empirical methods.
Ludwig Wittgenstein|Objective truth is not the privileged achievement of any one language-game, such as the natural sciences; different language-games capture different aspects.
Frank Ramsey|The whole theory of particulars and universals is due to mistaking for a fundamental characteristic of reality, what is merely a characteristic of language.
Frank Ramsey|The subject-predicate distinction isn’t a semantic or representational distinction, but rather a tool to communicate the focus of a discussion.
Frank Ramsey|To say “It is true that [proposition]” means no more than to assert the proposition itself; this usage is for emphasis or stylistic reasons, or for indication.
Frank Ramsey|The verb “is true” gives rise to artificial problems as to the nature of truth, which disappear when they are expressed in logical symbolism.
Frank Ramsey|A belief is true if it is a belief that p, and p.
Frank Ramsey|The meaning of a sentence is to be determined by reference to the actions to which asserting it would lead or by its possible causes and effects.
Frank Ramsey|In non-linguistic animals, beliefs are dispositions to act; e.g. a chicken abstaining from eating a sort of caterpillar based on unpleasant experiences.
Frank Ramsey|A belief is knowledge if it is true, certain, and obtained by a reliable process.
Frank Ramsey|Inductive arguments are justified insofar as the world is so constituted that they lead on the whole to true opinions.
Frank Ramsey|If two people are arguing “If p, will q?” and are both in doubt about p, they are fixing their degrees of belief in q given p.
Frank Ramsey|Laws of nature are the axioms and theorems in the simplest axiomatization of all of our knowledge.
Frank Ramsey|Laws (‘variable hypotheticals’) are not propositions or judgments but rules for judging ‘If I meet a ϕ, I shall regard it as a ψ’.
Frank Ramsey|Definitions for theoretical terms hinder scientific development because they require conceptual decisions based on fiat.
Frank Ramsey|A theory’s observational implications can be listed relationally by replacing the non-observable theoretical terms with existentially quantified predicate variables.
Frank Ramsey|The chief danger to philosophy is scholasticism: treating what is vague as if it were precise and trying to fit it into an exact logical category.
Martin Heidegger|We are part of the world we investigate; the central problem is not knowledge but the meaning of Being, which Western thinking has long trivialized or ignored.
Martin Heidegger|Dismantling (‘Destruktion’) of the traditional history of ontology can lead us back to the primordial experiences that reveal the nature of Being.
Martin Heidegger|Being is essentially different from beings (‘ontological difference’): rocks, people, numbers, universals are all beings, but they all have Being.
Martin Heidegger|To uncover Being and its meaning, we should carry out a phenomenological analysis of our awareness of our own everyday human ‘existence’, or ‘Dasein’.
Martin Heidegger|Dasein’s ‘Essence’ is grounded in its existence; our ‘substance’ is not spirit/soul, or an unchanging subject (“I”, Self, Ego), it is rather ‘existence’.
Martin Heidegger|‘Nothing’ is a positive ontological phenomenon – a necessary feature of the essential unfolding of Being.
Martin Heidegger|Our Being is ‘worldly’, with all the people, things, ideas, states of mind, moods, and situations that contextualize our everyday existence, ‘Being-in-the-world’.
Martin Heidegger|Our fundamental relation to the world is practical rather than cognitive: our understanding of the Being of beings is manifested in our acting with them.
Martin Heidegger|Discourse is not always about assertion, it is ‘worldly’: we assent, refuse, demand, warn, consult, share moods; keep silent, intonate, listen to, etc.
Martin Heidegger|Facticity is a characteristic of Dasein’s Being: we find ourselves in states of mind or moods, as if we had been thrown “there”, delivered over to the Being.
Martin Heidegger|Dasein is temporal: we always ‘project’ forward into possibilities (future) against the background of our everyday life (present) and our facticity (past).
Martin Heidegger|Dasein is distinguished by the fact that, in its very Being, that Being is an issue for it: humans, unlike rocks, care about their and others’ existence.
Martin Heidegger|Dasein is historical, being born into a tradition that influences its choices; it can live unaware of this or discover this and make more conscious choices.
Martin Heidegger|When we are absorbed in our everyday social contexts, we are ‘falling’ away from the projection of our authentic possibilities and our answerability.
Martin Heidegger|One is never in control of one’s own Being from the ground up; with the call of conscience, one owns this fact (‘guilt’) and chooses to choose to be a self (‘resoluteness’).
Martin Heidegger|Since Dasein is a Being which is ‘between’ birth and death, we cannot get it in our grasp as a whole; it has a constant ‘lack of totality’ which finds an end with death.
Martin Heidegger|Society does not permit us the courage for anxiety in the face of death; it transforms anxiety into indifferent tranquillity (alienation) or into fear labeled as weakness.
Martin Heidegger|Anxiety (not fear) in the face of death (“nothing”) is a liberating anticipation of one’s own potentiality, of an authentic existence; it individualizes us.
Martin Heidegger|What distinguishes modernity from the Greeks and the Middle Ages is that the world becomes object (picture, represented) and man becomes subject.
Martin Heidegger|The more objectively the object appears, the more inexorably do observations and teachings about the world transform into a subjective anthropology.
Martin Heidegger|In the battle of world views, science as research is the indispensable form of self-establishment in the world via calculation, planning, and breeding.
Martin Heidegger|With the beginnings of the battle for mastery of the earth, nature is willed out of the essence of being and appears as the object of technology.
Martin Heidegger|When mastery begins to be exercised by the unconditional will to power, Being becomes value, deprecated as a mere condition set by the will to power itself.
Martin Heidegger|The origin of the artwork – of creators and interpreters (‘preservers’) – is art, which is a poetic way beings are unconcealed and truth comes into being.
Rudolf Carnap|All legitimate knowledge is either scientific or logico-mathematical.
Rudolf Carnap|Philosophy is to be replaced by the logic of science – by the logical analysis of the concepts and sentences of the sciences.
Rudolf Carnap|The meaning of a sentence is identical with the way we determine its truth or falsehood; it has meaning only if such a determination is possible.
Rudolf Carnap|A definitive and final verification of a sentence is not possible; we can only confirm a sentence more and more.
Rudolf Carnap|It is impossible to test a single hypothetical sentence; the test applies to the whole system of physics as a system of hypotheses.
Rudolf Carnap|We can reconstruct scientific statements as structural statements (in a phenomenalist constitution system, in a physicalist constitution system, etc.).
Rudolf Carnap|Existence questions should be interpreted internally, relative to incommensurable ‘linguistic frameworks’ (mathematical or empirical).
Rudolf Carnap|When existence questions are interpreted externally, independent of any linguistic framework, they are pseudo-questions lacking cognitive meaning.
Rudolf Carnap|The pseudo-statements of metaphysics only serve to express the general attitude of a person towards life, like artworks do.
Rudolf Carnap|The truths of logic are a by-product of the meaning of the language we use for reasoning and calculation.
Rudolf Carnap|The truth of even what are supposed to be analytic truths may require revision in the light of experience.
Rudolf Carnap|Analyticity should be defined within linguistic frameworks describing a subject-matter (physics, astronomy, etc.).
Rudolf Carnap|The self is the class (not the collection) of the experiences; it is constructed only on a very high level.
Rudolf Carnap|There is no contradiction between free choice and determinism: if the act springs from one’s own character and preferences, then that person acts freely.
Susan Stebbing|What we ordinarily say, we say unclearly, because we think unclearly; it is the task of philosophy to render our thoughts clear.
Susan Stebbing|Insofar as the logical forms that the science of logic discovers are norms of thinking, logic can be described as a normative science.
Susan Stebbing|We cannot make everything clear at once using analysis; we must proceed step by step, beginning with propositions which we know to be true.
Susan Stebbing|The role of analysis is to understand something more clearly; simply replacing our ordinary vague concepts by precise ones does not always do that.
Susan Stebbing|Even metaphysical (reductive) analysis directed towards ‘basic facts’ does not always analyse the meaning of a proposition.
Susan Stebbing|“Logically constructed systems” with the fewest possible assumptions and primitive terms are too abstract; the world itself is not such a system.
Susan Stebbing|Ordinary language accurately describes everyday experience; for the scientific understanding of matter, a different type of language is necessary.
Susan Stebbing|The structures and principles of formal logic need not be seen as an isolated system; they can be applied to the problems and issues of modern life.
Susan Stebbing|Every person needs to hone their critical skills in order to identify misleading uses of language by advertisers, journalists, clergymen, and politicians.
Antonio Gramsci|There is no abstract “human nature”, fixed and immutable; human nature is the totality of historically determined social relations.
Antonio Gramsci|Each person is a “philosopher”, an artist: each person has a conscious line of moral conduct and sustains a conception of the world or modifies it.
Antonio Gramsci|The real philosopher is the politician, the active person who modifies their environment, i.e. the relations which define our individualities.
Antonio Gramsci|There is a minimum of creative intellectual activity even in physical work; all people are intellectuals, but not all have in society the function of intellectuals.
Antonio Gramsci|Every social group creates, organically, intellectuals who give it an awareness of its own function in the economic, social, and political fields.
Antonio Gramsci|Traditional intellectuals (scientists, philosophers, artists, etc.) see themselves as autonomous and independent of the dominant social group.
Antonio Gramsci|Hegemony entails for a class its execution of a leadership role on the economic, political, moral, and intellectual levels vis-a-vis other classes.
Antonio Gramsci|Organic intellectuals can be hegemonic (shaping the dominant frames of reference) or counter-hegemonic (calling those frames into question).
Antonio Gramsci|When a dominant class convinces all other classes that their interests can be met by aligning themselves with its rule, it becomes hegemonic.
Antonio Gramsci|An organic ideology, as a unified world-view, is diffused throughout the family, churches, the media, schools, the legal system, trade unions, etc.
Antonio Gramsci|Hegemonic rule, characterized by the predominance of consensus over coercion, represents a balance between “civil society” and “political society”.
Antonio Gramsci|An ideological struggle happens between two hegemonic principles for the “appropriation” of ideological elements, resulting in a new collective will.
Antonio Gramsci|In the modern world, technical education, closely bound to industrial labor, must form the basis of the new type of intellectual.
Antonio Gramsci|The mode of being of the new intellectual must consist in active participation in practical life, as constructor, organizer, “permanent persuader”.
Antonio Gramsci|The working class must, before exercising state power, attain leadership in the political, cultural, and moral fields with its own organic intellectuals.
Walter Benjamin|Within major historical periods, there are changes in the manner of sense perception of the human collective.
Walter Benjamin|The ‘one-of-a-kind’ value of the ‘genuine’ work of art has its underpinnings in the ritual in which it had its original, initial utility value.
Walter Benjamin|What shrinks in an age where the work of art can be reproduced by technological means is its ‘aura’: its here-and-now, its uniqueness, its authority.
Walter Benjamin|In manual reproduction the genuine article keeps its full authority; in technological reproduction that is not the case.
Walter Benjamin|Its being reproducible by technological means frees the work of art, for the first time, from its existence as a parasite upon ritual.
Walter Benjamin|Because of the weight placed on its display value, the work of art is becoming an image with new functions; the artistic function may be deemed incidental.
Walter Benjamin|When the criterion of genuineness in art production failed, the social function of art came to be underpinned by politics instead of ritual.
Walter Benjamin|Fascism seeks to give the masses a voice without changing the property relations; it leads logically to an aestheticization of political life.
Walter Benjamin|All efforts to aestheticize politics culminate in war; war only makes it possible to give masses a goal while retaining the ownership structure.
Suzanne Langer|We cannot explain the expressiveness of art merely in terms of associations set up between formal properties (color, etc.) and human feelings.
Suzanne Langer|Art is a highly articulated form of expression symbolizing direct/intuitive knowledge of life patterns (feeling, motion, etc.) inexpressible in ordinary language.
Suzanne Langer|We can fill the articulate forms of a music piece with any meaning that fits them; it may convey an idea of anything conceivable in its logical image.
Suzanne Langer|Unlike language, in art we do not have to learn vocabulary or grammar; feeling emerges from the form and we get it directly.
Burrhus Frederic Skinner|Mental activity is a form of (inner) behavior; it is irrelevant (explanatorily circular) in a functional analysis of behavior.
Burrhus Frederic Skinner|The only non-circular way to explain behavior is to appeal to something non-behavioral: environmental stimuli and the organism’s interactions with it.
Burrhus Frederic Skinner|What are introspectively observed are not the causes of the behavior, but certain collateral products of a person’s genetic and environment histories.
Burrhus Frederic Skinner|Neurobiological conditions sustain the functional/causal relations but they do not serve as ultimate or independent sources or explanations of behavior.
Burrhus Frederic Skinner|Organisms learn from their successes and mistakes, without being innately provided with implicit procedures by which to learn.
Burrhus Frederic Skinner|The analysis of behavior should strip away the functions assigned to a free or autonomous person and transfer them to the controlling environment.
Carl Hempel|The main aim of science is explanation.
Carl Hempel|A good scientific explanation is one that would have enabled the phenomenon to be predicted.
Carl Hempel|The logic of science is a combination of the deductive refutation and the inductive confirmation of theoretical predictions by observation.
Carl Hempel|In a scientific explanation, the explanandum must be a logical consequence of the explanans and the explanans must be true.
Carl Hempel|In a scientific explanation, the explanans must contain at least one law of nature and this must be an essential premise in the derivation.
Carl Hempel|The progress of science consists in the refinement of unrefuted theories.
Carl Hempel|Predictions of a theory should be couched in an ‘observation-language’ whose meaning is independent of the theory.
Carl Hempel|Theories which include reference to unobservable things are merely instruments for calculation.
Carl Hempel|Explanations in history must conform to the model of scientific explanations, involving (psychological) laws, causes, and effects.
Carl Hempel|All meaningful (verifiable) psychological statements are translatable into statements involving only the concepts of physics (about behaviour, neurology, etc.).
Carl Hempel|In order to characterize behavioral patterns, propensities, or capacities, we need not only a suitable behavioristic vocabulary, but psychological terms as well.
Karl Popper|Physical reality is of a very different nature from the human experience, and cannot be directly understood.
Karl Popper|Theories cannot be proved, but they can be disproved (falsified); criticism is the main method of progress.
Karl Popper|Theories are ‘corroborated’ when they survive several refutations; the better corroborated it is, the more it approximates to the truth.
Karl Popper|The progress of science consists in the replacement of refuted theories by theories that are only tentatively corroborated (conjectures).
Karl Popper|A statement that cannot be falsified by any observation is not scientific.
Karl Popper|The observations and experiments which test scientific theories are not independent of scientific theory.
Karl Popper|Unobservable things postulated by scientific theories are not intrinsically different from observable things; they are equally real.
Karl Popper|The question how it happens that a new idea or theory occurs to a person is irrelevant to the logical analysis of scientific knowledge.
Karl Popper|New ideas and free-will decisions may be the results of selections from repertoires of random events, like natural selection and genetic mutations.
Karl Popper|The mind is not like a passive bucket to be filled by sense-impressions, but like an active searchlight constantly testing hypotheses by trial and error.
Karl Popper|Three interacting realms: World 1 (objects of the natural sciences), World 2 (animal/human mental states and processes), World 3 (products of human thought).
Karl Popper|World 2 emerged as a product of biological evolution in World 1, and World 3 emerged as a product of evolution within the human World 2.
Karl Popper|World 3 objects (scientific theories, myths, artworks, etc.) may have an indirect but powerful effect on World 1, via World 2-based human action.
Karl Popper|Certainty is not possible in politics; the imposition of a single viewpoint is never justified.
Karl Popper|Centralized planning without criticism is the most undesirable form of society.
Karl Popper|A perfect static society is a dream; we can only engage in perpetual improvement, reducing social evils.
Karl Popper|We should claim, in the name of tolerance, the right not to tolerate the intolerant who use violence to suppress rational argument.
Gilbert Ryle|The analytical techniques of formal logic cannot resolve philosophical problems.
Gilbert Ryle|Materialist mechanism cannot by itself explain mental phenomena; human affairs need explanations of different kinds and levels.
Gilbert Ryle|Cartesian dualism (‘ghost in the machine’) is a category mistake: it represents mental life as belonging to the wrong logical type or category.
Gilbert Ryle|If the rationality of any given performance required the rational execution of some anterior (mental) performance, no rational performance could ever begin.
Gilbert Ryle|Our talk of “the mind” does not require the existence of a private space within which mental acts and happenings take place.
Gilbert Ryle|Having a mind is a matter of possessing abilities (knowing how to do things), dispositions, inclinations (emotions).
Gilbert Ryle|Knowing-how is not reducible to knowings-that; we can be instructed in truths, we can only be disciplined in methods, with exercises, criticisms, and examples.
Gilbert Ryle|Knowing-that presupposes knowing-how: establishing truths is an operation requiring rules of method, checks, tests, criteria, etc.
Gilbert Ryle|Logical rules, ethical or tactical maxims, and technical canons are educational tools for the half-trained; experts and saints do not need them.
Gilbert Ryle|Motives are not happenings and are not therefore of the right type to be causes.
Gilbert Ryle|When we perceive or have sensations, we are attending to features of the world or of our bodies, not to our experiences.
Gilbert Ryle|If our experiences have to be attended by us, that awareness experience also has to be attended – this sets off an absurd regress.
Gilbert Ryle|We can choose to attend to the experiences of perception/sensation, but it will be retrospective and fallible.
Gilbert Ryle|There is no difference in kind between what I can know about myself and what I can know about others, and differences in degree are not all in favor of self-knowledge.
Gilbert Ryle|Our first-person statements about intentions and decisions are ‘avowels’ and not descriptions of our mental states.
Gilbert Ryle|The self is elusive; when we try to attend to ourselves, we put ourselves beyond our reach.
Kurt Gödel|In any sufficiently powerful logical system F, there are statements which can neither be proved nor disproved in F.
Kurt Gödel|For any sufficiently powerful logical system F, the consistency of F cannot be proved in F itself.
Alfred Tarski|Our everyday language contains semantic terms such as “true” referring to its own sentences; it is ‘semantically closed’ and this causes antinomies.
Alfred Tarski|The solution to the Antinomy of the Liar is to have two languages: a ‘meta-language’ in which we can talk about the sentences of an ‘object-language’.
Alfred Tarski|Equivalence (T): The sentence “snow is white” [object-language] is true if, and only if, snow is white. [meta-language]
Alfred Tarski|We can use the term “true” in such a way that all equivalences of the form (T) (“X (name of p) is true if, and only if, p.”) can be asserted.
Alfred Tarski|The problem of the definition of truth can be solved only for formal languages; natural, spoken languages are too vague.
Alfred Tarski|We should reconcile ourselves with the fact that there may not be a single “right” conception of truth.
Alfred Tarski|We cannot get rid of the word “true” in a sentence like “The first sentence written by Plato is true”; the conception of truth is not sterile or useless.
Ernst Mayr|Proximate questions ask ‘how’ a biological mechanism works; ultimate questions are evolutionary questions asking ‘why’.
Ernst Mayr|Species are groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations, which are reproductively isolated from other such groups.
Ernst Mayr|A ‘selecton’ is a discrete entity and a cohesive whole, an individual or a social group, the survival and successful reproduction of which is favored by selection.
Georges Bataille|Human beings are beings of excess with exorbitant energy, fantasies, drives, needs, and heterogeneous desire.
Georges Bataille|The capitalist imperatives of labor, utility, and savings are unnatural, and go against human nature.
Georges Bataille|We can escape the existing imperatives of utility (capitalism) by pursuing a ‘general economy’ of expenditure, giving, sacrifice, and destruction.
Jacques Lacan|In the recognition of its mirror-image, the child is having its first anticipation of itself as a unified and separate individual.
Jacques Lacan|The ‘I’ is an ‘other’ from the ground up: an artificial projection of subjective unity modelled on how one is seen from other perspectives.
Jacques Lacan|‘The Imaginary’ is our quotidian reality: who and what one imagines other persons to be, who and what one imagines oneself to be, etc.
Jacques Lacan|‘The Symbolic’ is the customs, institutions, laws, mores, etc. of cultures and societies (the ‘Other’), entwined with language.
Jacques Lacan|‘The Real’ is whatever is beyond phenomenal appearances; it is intrinsically elusive and uncapturable by Imaginary-Symbolic signs.
Jacques Lacan|The insertion into socio-symbolic contexts and the dependence on the foreignness of signifiers amount to a ‘symbolic castration’.
Jacques Lacan|‘Master signifiers’ (those that the subject most deeply identifies with, like nationality) are actually signifiers without a signified.
Jacques Lacan|The unconscious is not an anarchic bundle of animalistic instincts like the id – it is structured like language.
Jacques Lacan|Demand – need = desire: vital requirements take on the excess baggage of meanings and become socio-symbolic demands for love.
Jacques Lacan|‘Drive’ extracts enjoyment (‘jouissance’) from the dissatisfactions of desire, sometimes through repetitive or overwhelming experiences.
Jacques Lacan|The Real of sexuation creates incommensurable structural-psychical positions for the sexes; there is no sexual relationship.
Theodor Adorno|There is no such thing as pure thought: thinking is a socio-historical form of activity, and there is not a universal standpoint to discern “truth”.
Theodor Adorno|‘Identity thinking’ is misrepresenting reality by putting specific phenomena under general, abstract classificatory headings.
Theodor Adorno|‘Identity thinking’ is fundamentally concerned not to understand phenomena but to control and manipulate it.
Theodor Adorno|The source of today’s disaster is the domination of nature and human beings by other human beings, in a capitalist economy fed by science and technology.
Theodor Adorno|A critique of modernity must also be a critique of premodernity; a turn toward the postmodern cannot simply be a return to the premodern.
Theodor Adorno|The instrumentalization of reason and the supremacy of “facts” established a single order: enlightenment is totalitarian (like myth).
Theodor Adorno|With the instrumentalization of reason and positivism, morality is put under the invalid, “meaningless” category of subjective knowledge.
Theodor Adorno|Intelligence is a moral category; the separation of feeling and understanding dismembers people into function.
Theodor Adorno|The ‘culture industry’ promotes domination by subverting the psychological development of the mass of people in capitalist societies.
Theodor Adorno|The commodities of the culture industry are increasingly standardized, formulaic, and repetitive in character.
Theodor Adorno|The standardization of music promotes a general condition of immaturity, prohibiting the exercise of any critical or reflexive faculties.
Hannah Arendt|The appeal of totalitarian ideologies, mobilizing populations, rests upon the devastation of ordered and stable contexts in which people once lived.
Hannah Arendt|One of the primary concerns of all tyrannical government is to isolate people against each other, thus rendering them powerless.
Hannah Arendt|The ideal subject of totalitarian rule is not the convinced Nazi or Communist, but people for whom the distinction between fact and fiction no longer exists.
Hannah Arendt|There are three types of human activities: labor, work, and action (in ascending hierarchy of importance).
Hannah Arendt|Labor is the biological practices necessary for the maintenance of life: an animal-like, unfree, private activity with impermanent products.
Hannah Arendt|Work is the fabrication of quasi-permanent physical and cultural artifacts: a non-animal, public activity with some degree of freedom.
Hannah Arendt|The rise of ‘animal laborans’ threatens the extinction of ‘homo faber’ and what makes a community’s public life possible (‘world alienation’).
Hannah Arendt|Authentic human action can initiate the wholly new – unanticipated, unconditioned by the laws of cause and effect.
Hannah Arendt|Actions cannot be justified for their own sake, but only in light of their public recognition and the shared rules of a political community.
Hannah Arendt|The raison d’être of politics is freedom, and its field of experience is action.
Hannah Arendt|Evil does not always come from malevolence; failures of thinking and judgment, sometimes abused by political systems, can result in evil.
Hannah Arendt|A disinterested and imaginatively publicly-minded form of political judgement is required to tackle the new circumstances of the modern era.
Jean-Paul Sartre|The object of consciousness exists in an independent way; however, consciousness itself is always consciousness “of something.”
Jean-Paul Sartre|The Ego is the transcendent object of one’s reflective experience, and not the subject of the pre-reflective experience of the world.
Jean-Paul Sartre|Since other minds are required to account for conscious states such as those of shame, this establishes their existence a priori.
Jean-Paul Sartre|The objectification of the other corresponds to an affirmation of my self by distinguishing myself from the other.
Jean-Paul Sartre|When I objectify the other, I deny its selfhood and therefore deny that with respect to which I want to affirm myself.
Jean-Paul Sartre|The instability of the dependence upon the other is characteristic of the typically conflictual state of our relations with others.
Jean-Paul Sartre|Consciousness can be directed at (imaginary) objects, values, meanings, facts that do not exist in the present; this non-being, nothingness, grounds our freedom.
Jean-Paul Sartre|The fundamental mode of existence of consciousness is future-oriented; it does not have a stable identity like a chair.
Jean-Paul Sartre|In being conscious of laws that determine how things will act, we transcend them; we always transcend what merely is, towards what is not.
Jean-Paul Sartre|In this Godless world we are thrown into, we are condemned to be free and to create our own values, with resulting responsibility and anguish.
Jean-Paul Sartre|Existence precedes essence; by choosing our values and our actions we determine the nature of our lives and personalities, we create ourselves and our destinies.
Jean-Paul Sartre|Freedom can be terrifying; many run away from it in ‘bad faith’ and act inauthentically, choosing existing societal norms.
Jean-Paul Sartre|The ongoing process of one’s existence, constantly reassumed so as to integrate new developments, cannot be fully self-conscious.
Jean-Paul Sartre|Psychoanalysis must consist in understanding our conducts in light of one’s project of existence and free choice – not just external and past events.
Jean-Paul Sartre|Emotions are intentional and strategic ways of coping with difficulties; we utilize them and control them, so we are free even in what we feel.
Jean-Paul Sartre|Many of us may not obviously be bigots or “settlers”, but we sustain an unjust system through our choices and sometimes wilful ignorance.
Jean-Paul Sartre|In an unjust society, the writer must jolt the audience from their complacency, rather than simply be concerned with art for its own sake.
Simone de Beauvoir|We should not flee but assume the ambiguity of the human condition: we are both free subjects and situated objects with instincts, desires, etc.
Simone de Beauvoir|Not all situations are equally compatible with the exercise of freedom: the failure to adopt an authentic attitude can be the result of oppression.
Simone de Beauvoir|The separation of our subjectivities entails that a revolt of the oppressed must in turn constrain the freedom of the oppressors; the conflict never ends.
Simone de Beauvoir|Men find in women another consciousness that does not demand reciprocal recognition, allowing them to escape the dialectic of master-slave.
Simone de Beauvoir|Woman is consistently defined as the Other by man who takes on the role of the Self; she positions herself according to him and not to herself.
Simone de Beauvoir|Men have been privileged with expressing transcendence through projects; women have been forced into the uncreative life of immanence.
Simone de Beauvoir|One is not born, but rather becomes, a woman – determined not by hormones, instincts, or a mysterious essence, but by her social interactions.
Simone de Beauvoir|The myth of the ‘Eternal Feminine’ (the mother, the virgin, the motherland, nature, etc.) traps women into an impossible ideal by denying their individuality.
Simone de Beauvoir|The inferiority of women and the conflicts between women and men merely mark a transitional moment in human history.
Simone de Beauvoir|Many women living in patriarchal cultures are guilty of ‘bad faith’; they flee their responsibility into prefabricated values and beliefs.
Simone de Beauvoir|Happiness is too hard to define and measure; the fortunes of the individual must be defined not in terms of happiness but in terms of liberty.
Simone de Beauvoir|Woman does wrong in yielding to the temptation of conformity in the anxiety of liberty; but man is in no position to blame her, since he has led her into it.
Simone de Beauvoir|Social systems must be altered for equal treatment of women, but women themselves also should take on their existential responsibility and freedom.
Simone de Beauvoir|It is not certain that women’s “worlds of ideas” will be different from men’s; we just have to wait and see.
Simone de Beauvoir|There will always be differences between man and woman in their sexual worlds: their relations to their own bodies, to that of the other sex, to the child.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|We are not immaterial centers of consciousness; we cannot perceive or act without our bodies.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|Consciousness is in the first place not a matter of “I think that” but of “I can”.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|I am never a thing and never naked consciousness, we are objects and subjects at the same time; there is therefore never determinism.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|Perceptual experience (and its normativity, representing things that appear elliptical from an oblique angle as being round) is intertwined with our bodily form.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|The mind does not use the body, but realizes itself through it and comes into the world while transferring the body outside of physical space.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|My body has its world, or understands its world without having to go through ‘representations,’ or being subordinated to a ‘symbolic’ or ‘objectifying function’.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|There is the body as defined by chemistry, by biology, by sociology, etc. – each of these degrees is soul for the preceding, body for the following.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|Each one of us has a unique position in space and time which affects how we perceive and experience the world.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|Our perspectives of the world slip into each other’s and we are brought together in a single world of anonymous subjects of perception.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|The objectification of each by the other’s gaze is felt as unbearable only because it takes the place of possible communication.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty|Solipsism would be strictly true only of someone who is aware of their existence without being or doing anything, which is impossible.
Albert Camus|It is absurd that we ask for meaning for our lives in a universe without meaning and purpose.
Albert Camus|The Absurd is not in humans nor in the world, but in their presence together; it is the only bond uniting them.
Albert Camus|There is but one truly serious philosophical problem and that is suicide.
Albert Camus|To kill oneself is a capitulation; we should refuse to surrender unto the meaninglessness of the universe.
Albert Camus|The religious solution of positing a transcendent world of solace and meaning beyond the Absurd is philosophical suicide.
Albert Camus|Science and rationalism always hit walls in their explanations of the world; the world is unreasonable.
Albert Camus|The only authentic and valid solution to the Absurd is simply to accept it, or better yet to embrace it, and to continue living. (‘Revolt’)
Albert Camus|True revolt is performed not just for the self but also in solidarity with and out of compassion for others.
Albert Camus|Living with the Absurd brings revolt (against the meaninglessness of life), freedom (from roles, goals, and values), and passion (living life to its fullest).
Albert Camus|An analysis of rebellion leads at least to the suspicion that, contrary to contemporary thought, a human nature does exist.
Albert Camus|Of all the methods of revolt, creation is the most effective; to work and create “for nothing,” to know one’s creation has no future, is wisdom.
Albert Camus|Art should not hope to make sense of life, but only to describe it without offering meaning or consolation.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|Not all laws are orders by a sovereign: there are laws that confer powers on people, reflect custom, or bind the legislators themselves.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|A habit of obedience is not sufficient to explain the continuity of legal authority and the persistence of laws in a succession of different legislators.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|Law is the union of primary and secondary rules.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|Primary (basic) rules are concerned with the actions that individuals must or must not do; they impose duties.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|Secondary rules are concerned with the primary rules, specifying the ways in which they may be recognized, changed, and adjudicated.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|The rule of recognition is the ultimate rule, socially accepted to provide the criteria of validity for the other rules; it itself can neither be valid nor invalid.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|It is in no sense a necessary truth that laws reproduce or satisfy certain demands of morality, though in fact they have often done so.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|The general language of legislation needs interpretation and may prove indeterminate in some cases; it is open-textured like natural languages.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|It is possible to be concerned with the rules, either merely as an external observer, or as a member of the group which critically accepts and uses them.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|Reference to the internal point of view is required for the analysis of the concepts of obligation, duty, legislation, jurisdiction, validity, and legal powers.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|Certain facts about humans (vulnerability, approximate equality, limited altruism, etc.) result in common elements in the law and conventional morality.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|The painful facts of human history (e.g. slavery) show that a viable society need not offer the same protections and benefits to all of its members.
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart|Accepting the possibility of valid but morally iniquitous laws would make people clear sighted in confronting the official abuse of power.
Alfred Jules Ayer|The function of philosophy is not factual speculation but logical clarification and analysis of (especially scientific) language.
Alfred Jules Ayer|A statement has meaning iff it is either analytic or (weakly) verifiable – if it is possible for experience to render it probable.
Alfred Jules Ayer|Analytic propositions are tautological, but there is a sense in which they give us new knowledge: they bring to light the implications of our linguistic usages.
Alfred Jules Ayer|All metaphysical sentences (and many disputes in philosophy) are meaningless: they involve neither tautologies nor empirical hypotheses.
Alfred Jules Ayer|The principles of logic and mathematics are true universally because we cannot abandon them without sinning against the rules of language use.
Alfred Jules Ayer|All synthetic propositions, including the ones describing sense-contents, are hypotheses; there is no absolute validation/invalidation.
Alfred Jules Ayer|It is never just a single hypothesis which an observation confirms or discredits, but always a system of hypotheses.
Alfred Jules Ayer|The word ‘truth’ does not stand for anything; the terms ‘true’ and ‘false’ function in the sentence simply as marks of assertion and denial.
Alfred Jules Ayer|The only test for forms of self-consistent scientific procedures (e.g. induction) is the test of success in practice – in predicting future experience.
Alfred Jules Ayer|Material things (including people) are logical constructions out of sense-contents; belief in the existence of substances/substrata leads to confusion.
Alfred Jules Ayer|An object being a logical construction out of sense-contents only means that all sentences referring to it are translatable into sentences referring to them.
Alfred Jules Ayer|The substantive ego is a fictitious metaphysical entity; to say anything about the self is always to say something about sense-experiences.
Alfred Jules Ayer|If I know that an object behaves in every way as a conscious being must, by definition, behave, then I know that it is really conscious.
Alfred Jules Ayer|Statements of (ethical or aesthetic) value have no factual meaning; they only evince ‘emotive’ dis/approval.
Alfred Jules Ayer|Ethical terms do not serve only to express feeling but also to arouse feeling, and so to stimulate action, even to command.
Alfred Jules Ayer|The purpose of aesthetic criticism is not so much to give knowledge as to communicate emotion and make us share the critic’s attitude towards the work.
Alfred Jules Ayer|‘Basic propositions’ that refer solely to the content of a single experience can be verified conclusively by the occurrence of that experience.
John Langshaw Austin|Ordinary language embodies the inherited experience and acumen of many generations; it is not the last word, but it is the first word.
John Langshaw Austin|For the objects of perception, the reality-appearance duality is misconceived; the term ‘real’ has many different uses.
John Langshaw Austin|The application of the positive term (reality, freedom, etc.) depends on its negative term, which is itself contextual.
John Langshaw Austin|The search for absolute certainty is both fruitless and unwanted.
John Langshaw Austin|Because a belief is about something, its truth is independent of the fact that it is believed; it must be possible for the thinker to be mistaken.
John Langshaw Austin|What is evidence for what is always contextual; there is no limit to the kinds of evidence that might turn out to be relevant.
John Langshaw Austin|There can’t be a theory providing an abstract recipe for the totality of evidence for a particular claim.
John Langshaw Austin|In sceptical arguments we should locate our doubts only in specific contexts of inquiry.
John Langshaw Austin|Utterances are not always descriptions (‘constatives’); they can be ‘performatives’ in which we do things with words (promises, threats, etc.).
John Langshaw Austin|Three types of speech act: locutionary (what I say), illocutionary (what I do in saying that), perlocutionary (what effect it has on the listener).
John Langshaw Austin|Claims to knowledge (“I know that S is P”) can also be performatives where we give others our authority (for saying that S is P).
Ernst Gombrich|Representation, unlike resemblance, involves manipulating signs that will be recognized as standing for particular things.
Ernst Gombrich|The innocent eye is a myth, seeing is never just registering: all thinking is sorting, classifying, and all perceiving relates to expectations and comparisons.
Ernst Gombrich|Pictorial realism is not just the faithful copying from an art-independent reality; it involves illusions using conventional perceptual ‘schemata’.
Ernst Gombrich|Artists cannot escape from the stylistic and pictorial conventions of their cultural background, but they can modify them.
Ernst Gombrich|The artistic process of first making and then matching and remaking (trial and error) is much like how science works.
Ernst Gombrich|The viewer’s practised perception is taken into account during the creative process, so that they can interpret the conventional signs.
Ernst Gombrich|Visual experience is not entirely determined by cultural conventions: it is organized according to the laws of optics and perspective.
Nelson Goodman|Judgments about qualia are decrees; which ones are accepted is a matter of the overall coherence of my system of beliefs and my other qualia judgments.
Nelson Goodman|Two terms have the same meaning iff they have the same primary and secondary extensions (the extension of its compounds, like “P-picture”).
Nelson Goodman|P-descriptions that are not Q-descriptions (“is a P but not a Q”) are easy to construct for any P and Q; strict synonymy is impossible.
Nelson Goodman|Synonymy and analyticity are matters of degree, depending on how uninteresting the constructs that make a difference in secondary extension are.
Nelson Goodman|Positional predicates (with definitions referring to place/time constants) can generate mutually incompatible predictions, all confirmed by the past evidence.
Nelson Goodman|The positionality of a predicate is relative to a language; there is no semantic or syntactic criterion to choose predicates suitable for induction.
Nelson Goodman|The choice of predicates is a matter of ‘entrenchment’ – of what language we use and have used to describe the behaviour of our world.
Nelson Goodman|Instances of intuitive inferences and the rules of inference are slowly adjusted to justify each other in a process of reflective equilibrium.
Nelson Goodman|A hypothesis is ‘projectible’ (suitable for induction) iff it is supported, unviolated, and unexhausted, and all hypotheses conflicting with it are overridden.
Nelson Goodman|Counterfactual conditionals are a particular variety of strict conditional (restricting attention to those possibilities where all facts ‘co-tenable’ with p are true).
Nelson Goodman|There are conflicting truths that cannot be accommodated in a single world version: we need many worlds to accommodate the conflicting versions.
Nelson Goodman|Worlds are made by answering to right versions (with entrenchment, simplicity, usefulness, etc.); there are no worlds that correspond to false/possible versions.
Nelson Goodman|A Reality underlying the worlds must be fully neutral, and thus serves no purpose; it would have no spacetime, no relations, no structure at all.
Nelson Goodman|The world versions suffice, and are really the only things that are directly accessible; the versions can for many purposes be treated as worlds.
Nelson Goodman|There is no sharp division between art, science, and philosophy: they all use symbol systems to perceive and understand the world, to construct worlds.
Nelson Goodman|There are logical differences between representation and resemblance; e.g. two chairs resemble, but do not represent, one another.
Nelson Goodman|Aesthetics is a branch of epistemology; artworks are made of symbols and require interpretation to understand what they refer to, in which ways and systems.
Nelson Goodman|Denotation (labeling) and exemplification (referring back to the label, like a color swatch) are the two fundamental forms of symbolization in art.
Nelson Goodman|A non-representational work of art expresses something when it metaphorically exemplifies it, by calling attention to some of its features.
Nelson Goodman|Since to be a work of art is to perform certain referential functions, the question “What is art?” should be replaced with the question “When is art?”.
Nelson Goodman|A work of art is ‘autographic’ iff the distinction between original and forgery of it is significant; iff even a perfect duplication does not count as genuine.
Nelson Goodman|A work of art is ‘allographic’ iff it allows for instantiations of the work that are independent of the work’s history of production.
Nelson Goodman|Representational painting lacks the notational features of languages (and allographic arts) that make repetition possible; it is not a language.
Nelson Goodman|When we know we are looking at an original painting and its perfect copy, there is an aesthetic difference as the awareness modifies our perception.
Nelson Goodman|There is no innocent eye, how and what it sees is regulated by need and prejudice; it selects, rejects, organizes, associates, classifies, analyzes, constructs.
Nelson Goodman|Pictures can denote things because we have learned the visual conventions (including perspective), not just because they resemble those things.
Willard Van Orman Quine|There are red things and meaningful utterances but there may not be additional entities named “redness” or “meaning”.
Willard Van Orman Quine|The two useful ways in which people talk about meanings – significance and synonymy – could be defined in terms of behavior.
Willard Van Orman Quine|Necessity depends on our ways of referring to things; it is not a trait of things themselves.
Willard Van Orman Quine|Ontological controversy tends into controversy over language, but we must not jump to the conclusion that what there is depends on words.
Willard Van Orman Quine|There is no way to define analyticity without an appeal to synonymy (or semantical rules) defined analytically; it’s a vicious circle.
Willard Van Orman Quine|A boundary between analytic and synthetic statements cannot be drawn; truth depends both on language and on extra-linguistic fact.
Willard Van Orman Quine|Our whole knowledge is a network which impinges on experience only along the edges; centrally located statements (e.g. logic, physics) are more resistant.
Willard Van Orman Quine|There are no principled limits to the range of evidence for a statement; evidence and understanding are holistic.
Willard Van Orman Quine|Nothing, including putative conceptual truths, logic, and mathematics, is immune from revision in the light of experience.
Willard Van Orman Quine|Even the truths of elementary number theory are presumably not in general derivable by self-evident steps from self-evident truths.
Willard Van Orman Quine|Science as a whole network has its double dependence upon language and experience; this duality is not traceable into single statements.
Willard Van Orman Quine|In point of epistemological footing the physical objects and the gods differ only in degree and not in kind; they are both convenient myths.
Willard Van Orman Quine|The myth of physical objects is epistemologically superior to most in that it has proved more efficacious than other myths.
Willard Van Orman Quine|The indispensability of mathematics to empirical science gives us good reason to believe in the existence of mathematical entities.
Willard Van Orman Quine|Epistemology should be naturalized, by studying empirically (psychologically) how people transform sensory input into theoretical output.
Willard Van Orman Quine|There is redundancy in our belief networks, so we can question and change one part without compromising all the rest.
Willard Van Orman Quine|Translation between languages is underdetermined: there are multiple equally good translations.
Willard Van Orman Quine|Indeterminacy of translation implies indeterminacy of communication, even of thinking.
Willard Van Orman Quine|When the deviant logician tries to deny the doctrine, they only change the subject; a change of logic entails a change of meaning.
Willard Van Orman Quine|You can bathe in the same river twice, but not in the same river ‘stage’; ostension, identification, and induction convey spatio-temporal spread.
William Frankena|External moral requirements are ‘justifying’ reasons for action, different from internal ‘motivating’ reasons.
William Frankena|The morality of duty and principles and the morality of virtues are not rivals, but two complementary aspects of the same morality.
Clement Greenberg|The essence of art coincides with all that is unique in the nature of its medium; effects that might belong to other mediums must be eliminated.
Clement Greenberg|It has been in search of the absolute that the avant-garde has arrived at abstract art; it is an imperative that comes from history.
Clement Greenberg|The avant-garde (abstract) artist imitates God by creating something valid solely on its own terms: increate, independent of meanings, similars, or originals.
Clement Greenberg|Quality in art can be neither ascertained nor proved by logic or discourse; it depends on inspired, felt relations or proportions.
Clement Greenberg|Things that purport to be art do not function, do not exist, as art until they are experienced through taste.
Clement Greenberg|There is a consensus of taste; the best taste is that of the people who spend the most time and trouble on art.
Wilfrid Sellars|We should be stereoscopic with the ‘scientific image’ and the ‘manifest image’ of the world.
Wilfrid Sellars|The manifest image is the framework in which we first came to be aware of ourselves as persons.
Wilfrid Sellars|The conception of the physical world characteristic of the manifest image is incorrect insofar as it conflicts with the scientific image.
Wilfrid Sellars|Knowledge (justification) belongs within the ‘logical space of reasons’; it cannot be grounded in the bare facts of sense-experience. (‘The Myth of the Given’)
Wilfrid Sellars|Sense-experience (‘the Given’) cannot certify the authenticity of information but it can cause us to form reliable beliefs.
Wilfrid Sellars|The unobservables posited by a theory explain directly why observable entities behave the way they do and obey the empirical laws they do.
Wilfrid Sellars|Our concepts of sensory states and psychological states (hope, regret, desire, etc.) are like theoretical concepts in the sciences.
Wilfrid Sellars|We can use the analogy of brain states as sentence-like structures and translate them into our own language to assess them rationally.
Wilfrid Sellars|The aim of philosophy is to understand how things in the broadest possible sense of the term hang together in the broadest possible sense of the term.
Peter Strawson|The meaning of a referring expression and its referent in a particular context are separate things.
Peter Strawson|A sentence with a vacuous referring expression is meaningful, but is not a statement (true or false).
Peter Strawson|There is a distinction between the contextual presuppositions of a sentence and its logical implications.
Peter Strawson|Ascribing truth to a proposition is performative: the speaker is not characterizing the proposition itself but licensing our adoption of (the belief in) the proposition.
Peter Strawson|Sceptical doubts amount to the rejection of the whole conceptual scheme within which such doubt make sense.
Peter Strawson|To ask whether it is reasonable to rely on induction is like asking whether it is reasonable to proportion the degree of one’s convictions to the strength of the evidence.
Peter Strawson|Self-consciousness requires that there is a distinction between ourselves and others; thus, others really exist.
Peter Strawson|The basic structure of our conceptual scheme lies so deep in our thought and practice that its legitimation is neither possible nor necessary.
Peter Strawson|The primitive concept of a person allows us to see human life with physical and (irreducible) mental aspects without being dualistic.
Paul Grice|Meaning can be ‘natural’ (e.g. spots meaning measles) or ‘nonnatural’ (dependent on communicators’ intentions).
Paul Grice|When something has natural meaning, what it means cannot be false; when something has nonnatural meaning, what it means can be false.
Paul Grice|Not all things with meanings are signs (e.g. words are not), and some things with nonnatural meaning are not conventional (e.g. certain gestures).
Paul Grice|“A meant something by x” is roughly equivalent to “A uttered x with the intention of inducing a belief by means of the recognition of this intention”.
Paul Grice|“x means (nonnatural) (timeless) that so-and-so” might be equated with some statement about what “people” (vague) intend to effect by x.
Paul Grice|Intentions are transmitted perlocutionarily, by an effect produced by the speaker on the listener that is exterior to the functioning of linguistic conventions.
Paul Grice|The ‘conversational implicature’ of an utterance can be different from its strict meaning; it is central to humor, rudeness, etc.
Paul Grice|Two simultaneous experiences are had by the same person because they can be known by introspection to be simultaneous.
Donald Campbell|All knowledge claims go beyond their evidence, are highly presumptive and corrigible.
Donald Campbell|Knowledge needs to be explained using biological, psychological, sociological, historical knowledge; no first philosophy is required. (‘evolutionary epistemology’)
Donald Campbell|An ‘epistemology of the other one’ must deal with how organisms come to know, not how a first-person knower acquires knowledge.
Donald Campbell|There are different vehicles carrying knowledge, with different physical structures: genes, paper, electronic chips, etc.
Donald Campbell|There are different knowledge mechanisms: non-mnemonic problem solving, habit, instinct, cultural transmission, science, etc.
Donald Campbell|A blind-variation-and-selective-retention (BVSR) process is fundamental to all inductive achievements, to all genuine increases in knowledge.
Donald Campbell|The many processes (e.g. vision) which shortcut a more full BVSR process contain wisdom about the environment achieved originally by BVSR.
Donald Campbell|The shortcut processes contain in their own operation a BVSR process at some level (e.g. vision substituting for overt locomotor exploration).
Donald Campbell|Innovative thought is a BVSR process; “foresight” is a result, once the process has blindly stumbled into a thought trial that fits the selection criterion.
Donald Campbell|Biological systems are hierarchically structured, and there is ‘downward causation’ when a higher structure operates causally upon its substructure.
Monroe Beardsley|Aesthetics is meta-criticism; there would be no problems of aesthetics if no one ever talked about works of art.
Monroe Beardsley|In aesthetic experience, we attend to the regional qualities (color, pitch, etc.) and the formal unity (patterns or the organization of parts) of an object.
Monroe Beardsley|The detachedness of aesthetic experience blocks artworks’ referential characteristics from referring to anything outside of the experience.
Monroe Beardsley|A work of art is an arrangement of conditions intended to be capable of affording an experience with marked aesthetic character.
Monroe Beardsley|Aesthetic experience, and thus aesthetic objects, are instrumentally valuable, being productive of human welfare.
Monroe Beardsley|In aesthetic experience, the ‘presentation’ is one’s particular experience of a particular ‘performance’ of a particular ‘production’ of an ‘artifact’.
Monroe Beardsley|In painting and sculpture, the distinction between artifact and production almost disappears.
Monroe Beardsley|The aesthetic object, the primary object of critical attention, is the production.
Monroe Beardsley|External evidence – evidence from the psychological and social background of the object – is forbidden in art criticism.
Monroe Beardsley|A person’s affective responses to a work of art are irrelevant to its descriptive, interpretive, and evaluative properties.
Monroe Beardsley|The artist’s intentions are irrelevant to the descriptive, interpretive, and evaluative properties of the work.
Monroe Beardsley|What a sentence means depends not on the whim of the individual but upon conventions of usage; an author can be wrong about what their own work means.
Monroe Beardsley|What poets and other authors of literary works do is represent the performance of illocutionary acts, not perform the illocutionary acts themselves.
Morris Weitz|If we look at what we call “art”, we will find no common properties – only strands of similarities, “family resemblances”.
Morris Weitz|The expansive, adventurous, innovative character of art makes it logically impossible to insure any set of defining properties; art is an open concept.
Morris Weitz|Most literary works contain printed or suggested truth claims which are called upon to take as serious commentaries on life.
Morris Weitz|Sometimes truth is irrelevant to aesthetic assessment, but claims made in artworks can also be aesthetically relevant in some cases.
Roland Barthes|Myth is a second-order semiological system, a metalanguage: a sign (‘meaning’) in the first-order language becomes a signifier (‘form’) in the second.
Roland Barthes|Not only written discourse, but also photography, cinema, reporting, sport, shows, publicity, all these can serve as a support to mythical speech.
Roland Barthes|Myth hides nothing, its function is to steal and distort: it purifies things, it makes them innocent, it gives them a natural and eternal justification.
Roland Barthes|Myth in a bourgeois society is depoliticized speech: it suggests a world where bourgeois norms are experienced as the evident laws of a natural order.
Roland Barthes|There is one language which is not mythical: that of the oppressed, speaking in order to transform reality and not to preserve it as an image.
Roland Barthes|It is language which speaks, not the author; to write is to reach that point where only language acts, ‘performs’, and not ‘me’.
Roland Barthes|The Author is thought to exist before the book, thinking, suffering, living for it, like a parent; the modern scriptor is born simultaneously with the text.
Roland Barthes|A text does not have a single ‘theological’ meaning; it is a multi-dimensional space in which a variety of writings, none of them original, blend and clash.
Roland Barthes|The work closes on a signified (evident or interpreted); the Text practises the infinite deferment of the signified: its field is that of the signifier.
Roland Barthes|The work grows by ‘development’, like an organism; the Text is like a network and it can extend itself as a result of a combinatory systematic.
Roland Barthes|The ‘writerly’ text makes the reader no longer a passive consumer (like the classic ‘readerly’ texts do), but a producer of the text.
Roland Barthes|The destination of a text cannot any longer be personal: the reader is without history, biography, psychology.
Roland Barthes|The text itself plays and the reader plays twice over; playing the Text as one plays a game, but also playing it in the musical sense of the term.
Roland Barthes|The pleasure of the work remains a pleasure of consumption; as for the Text, it is bound to jouissance, that is to a pleasure without separation.
Roland Barthes|Historically, the reign of the Author has also been that of the Critic; criticism is today undermined along with the Author.
Peter Geach|Propositions must be distinguished from assertions: a predicate may be attached to a subject in a subordinate clause.
Peter Geach|Names and predicables differ from each other: a name has a complete sense, a predicable does not, containing an empty place to be filled by a subject.
Peter Geach|Not only proper names but also common nouns can occur as the subjects of sentences; we may tell a story switching between “Jemima” and “the cat”.
Peter Geach|There is no such thing as absolute identity (without some general term): A and B may be the same F, but not the same G.
Peter Geach|There is no such thing as being just good or bad, there is only being a good or bad so-and-so; ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are attributive, not predicative.
Peter Geach|Sentences expressing moral judgments can be embedded in semantically complex sentences in a way that a noncognitivist cannot explain.
Peter Geach|An ought thesis can follow logically from factual premises together with a vacuous deontic premise.
Peter Geach|A mental state cannot be defined as a disposition for a behavior without referring to the other mental states (beliefs, desires) of the agent.
Peter Geach|The intentional modes of description needed for human activities are logically not derivable from natural science.
Peter Geach|Humans have distinctive mental capacities (e.g. rationality) that cannot be explained by Darwinian processes; they are miraculously created.
Peter Geach|Materialists (“We think with the brain”) and immaterialists (“We think with some non bodily part”) are both wrong: there is no such thing as an organ of thought.
Peter Geach|The one reality, the divine creation ultimately rooted in God himself is the ultimate truthmaker; God is Truth.
Peter Geach|God is not omnipotent but rather he is almighty: he has power over all things.
Peter Geach|There is no future there for God to see: he knows the future not by seeing it but by controlling it.
Peter Geach|Sympathy with animal suffering would not be a virtue in God: it is a virtue in humans only because we share an animal nature.
Elizabeth Anscombe|Since no mistake of reference is possible for ‘I’, it cannot be a referring expression at all; it is a word with a use but no reference.
Elizabeth Anscombe|Any causal law linking a cause with an effect will have to be of the form “If C then E, other things being equal” – very often other things are not equal.
Elizabeth Anscombe|We can know that one thing caused another without knowing any true law involving a necessary connection between events of general types.
Elizabeth Anscombe|Actions are identified and understood by reference to the intentions with which they were performed.
Elizabeth Anscombe|The ‘practical knowledge’ of action is different from the ‘contemplative’ knowledge of science.
Elizabeth Anscombe|Unintentional causes of action (‘mental causes’) are not reasons for action.
Elizabeth Anscombe|The intention is not a cause: causes are distinct from their effects, whereas intentional actions are not distinct from the intentions they embody.
Elizabeth Anscombe|We know what we are doing because we know our intentions, and we do not have to look and see what we are doing to have this knowledge.
Elizabeth Anscombe|There are objects of perception in both a material and an intentional sense; idealism and ordinary language philosophy (direct realism) conflate them.
Elizabeth Anscombe|Thinking of morality as a set of rules prescribing what we “ought” to do presupposes a religious conception about what is “owed” to God.
Elizabeth Anscombe|A secular culture should construct a new morality based on our understanding of particular virtues and vices.
Elizabeth Anscombe|A secular morality requires a new philosophy of mind which will break with the old ways of thinking about the roles of beliefs and desires in explaining action.
Elizabeth Anscombe|Getting one another to do things without the application of physical force – through institutions like promising – is a necessity for human life.
Elizabeth Anscombe|The practice of the virtues should connect with a potentiality for ‘human flourishing’.
Elizabeth Anscombe|Actions can be bad and can be known to be bad without observing them or their results.
Elizabeth Anscombe|Utilitarianism cannot sustain any strict prohibitions because it cannot distinguish between intended and merely foreseen consequences.
Elizabeth Anscombe|Masturbation, sex with contraception, and gay sex are abuses of the sexual organs that can never lead to procreation – an insult to life itself.
Peter Winch|Intention and action are not distinct existences; reasons are not causes.
Peter Winch|The relationship between an action and a reason does not have to be the same every time and for every agent, unlike a causal relationship.
Peter Winch|The study of society is about the logical relationships between the beliefs and intentions, and the rules of social institutions.
Peter Winch|Social studies are not causal inquiries; there cannot be a social science.
Donald Davidson|The truth-conditions of a sentence provide its meaning: someone who knows under what conditions a sentence would be true understands that sentence.
Donald Davidson|We get to meaning by interpreting others, by presuming that their beliefs are largely true and that they are generally rational.
Donald Davidson|Language isn’t a network of social conventions; there are just the general grammatical capacities and individual communicative strategies.
Donald Davidson|There is an autonomy of meaning whereby speakers can distance themselves from the literal meaning of their words (jokes, irony, etc.).
Donald Davidson|Languages provide ways of thinking about and expressing truths about this world, so they are translatable.
Donald Davidson|One cannot be a thinker at all unless one has beliefs.
Donald Davidson|One cannot have a belief unless one recognizes that one might be in error.
Donald Davidson|It is only through seeing others’ errors that one can understand the possibility of being in error oneself.
Donald Davidson|A creature cannot have thoughts unless it is an interpreter of the speech of another; “no thought without talk.”
Donald Davidson|A new replica of me could not be said to have thoughts or meaningful words, without the causal history to establish the connections between itself and the world.
Donald Davidson|The relation between a sensation and a belief cannot be logical, since sensations are not beliefs or other propositional attitudes; the relation is causal.
Donald Davidson|At least some mental events interact causally with physical events.
Donald Davidson|Where there is causality, there must be a law: events related as cause and effect fall under strict deterministic laws.
Donald Davidson|Mental concepts, insofar as they involve propositional attitudes partly identified by their logical relations, are normative; physical concepts are not.
Donald Davidson|Mental entities are neither definitionally nor nomologically reducible to the vocabulary of physics; there are no strict (‘homonomic’) psychophysical laws.
Donald Davidson|Mental events (taken as unrepeatable, dated individuals) are identical with physical events.
Donald Davidson|Reasons and actions are in causal relationships in their physical states but these relationships cannot be subsumed under law.
Donald Davidson|Mental characteristics ‘supervene’ on physical characteristics: there cannot be two events alike in all physical respects but differing in mental respects.
Donald Davidson|Facts really are the true statements themselves; facts are not named by them.
Abraham Irving Melden|The relation between the wanting to do and the doing is logical (conceptual, a priori), so it cannot be a causal one.
Abraham Irving Melden|Actions cannot be causally determined; the free will debate should not arise at all.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|The passage of time is an illusion: if it really passed, then we could ask at what rate it passes, but this requires a second time-dimension, and so on.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|The universe is a four-dimensional space-time manifold; present, past and future are all equally real.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|If the phenomenalist about theoretical entities is correct, we must believe in cosmic coincidence in our successful scientific predictions.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|States and processes of the mind are identical to states and processes of the brain.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|A person can talk about their sensations without knowing about their brain processes, just as they can talk about lightning without knowing anything of electricity.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|“I have a yellowish-orange after-image” only means “There is something going on which is like what is going on when I see an orange”.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|The apparent features of experience are not genuine properties “in the mind” or “in the world” but only the contents of mental representations.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|Neither determinism nor pure chance leaves room for free will and moral responsibility, and there is no third possibility.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|The metaphysical question of determinism is quite irrevelant to the rationality of our (pragmatic) ascription of responsibility.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|The rightness of individual actions is to be judged by their particular consequences; general rules, like “keep promises”, are mere rules of thumb.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|Obeying rules where we know that to break them will have better results is a form of superstitious rule-worship.
John Jamieson Carswell Smart|We do not want to obtain our pleasures by operating electrodes stimulating the pleasure centers in our brains; we want to achieve things.
Richard Hare|Ethics is the logical study of the language of morals.
Richard Hare|There can be no ethical difference between two possible states of affairs or actions without there being some natural difference between them.
Richard Hare|There is a logical distinction between facts and values; morality is ‘prescriptive’ and is not a domain of moral facts to be ‘described’.
Richard Hare|Value-terms have a special function in language, that of commending; they cannot be defined in terms of other words which do not perform this function.
Richard Hare|Moral imperatives are instances of principles that we are prepared to universalize.
Richard Hare|Actions are right if they maximize the satisfaction of preferences or desires, no matter what the preferences may be for.
Richard Hare|Imaginative identification with others reveals principles that provide the best ways of fulfilling the preferences of all those who might be affected.
John Mackie|If there were objective values, they would be very strange things, utterly different from anything else in the universe; they are metaphysically queer.
John Mackie|If there were objective values, our awareness of them would require a strange kind of special faculty; they are epistemologically queer.
John Mackie|The variations of moral codes and beliefs imply that they reflect ways of life, not that they express perceptions of objective values.
John Mackie|Although most people making moral judgments implicitly claim to be pointing to something objectively prescriptive, these claims are all false.
John Mackie|The final stage of the universalization of moral judgements, taking account of different tastes and rival ideals, is logically impossible.
John Mackie|A logical or semantic truth is no real constraint on belief, action, prescription, or choice of policy.
John Mackie|The utilitarian calculus is an unhelpful myth; there is no such common measure of all interests and purposes as happiness or utility is supposed to be.
John Mackie|Concrete moral issues can be argued out without appeal to any mythical objective values or obligations, or to a fictitious unitary measurable happiness.
John Mackie|Morality is not to be discovered but to be made and maintained (and in part remade as time passes); we have to decide what moral views to adopt.
John Mackie|Our evolved moral sentiments and dispositions, and more formal rules along with politico-legal devices are complementary parts of the device of morality.
John Mackie|Socially established – and socially necessary – patterns of behaviour are ‘objectified’ into moral values to put pressure on individuals.
John Mackie|Egoism and self-referential altruism (concern for others who have some special connection with oneself) form a central part of the good life.
John Mackie|A virtue is a disposition which is usually advantageous for its possessor and which harmonizes with knowledge, with seeing things as they are.
John Mackie|The idea of a non-empirical free self that is not caused by one’s character, desires, etc. is incoherent; we shouldn’t base our concept of freedom on it.
John Mackie|An agent is responsible for all and only their intentional actions; even if determinism holds, the moral principles will still have their points.
John Mackie|A cause is an insufficient but necessary (non-redundant) part of an unnecessary but sufficient (‘INUS’) condition for the effect.
John Mackie|There could not be logically contingent states of affairs, prior to the creation of free beings, which an omnipotent god would have to accept.
John Mackie|The propositions that a good omnipotent thing exists, and that evil exists, are logically incompatible.
Philippa Foot|If an action is in our interests, we have reason to do it, and the virtues are always in one’s interest.
Philippa Foot|The “categorical” commands of morality are like those of etiquette: one can rationally ignore them, lacking the purpose of being moral.
Philippa Foot|Quite apart from thoughts of duty a person may care about the suffering of others, having a sense of identification with them and wanting to help.
Philippa Foot|It is sometimes permissible to bring about a bad result that one foresees as a consequence of one’s action but does not directly intend. (double effect)
Philippa Foot|There is a moral distinction between doing and allowing; we may not steal someone’s property, yet we may not be required to secure their possession of it.
Philippa Foot|It is impermissible to kill (to initiate a causal sequence that kills) one person to save another; the negative rights have priority over the positive rights.
Philippa Foot|In the Trolley Problem (killing one vs. five people), it is preferable for the driver to minimize the violation of negative rights by turning the trolley.
Philippa Foot|The distinction between avoiding injury and bringing aid seems more important than the ones between direct-indirect intention or between doing-allowing.
Philippa Foot|Virtue is a disposition of the will: good intentions are not sufficient, we must take the trouble to cultivate the desire to act well.
Philippa Foot|The virtues are needed for humans as a corrective to general human characteristics that make it difficult for us to act well.
Philippa Foot|Imperatives with no relevance to human interests do not become moral requirements simply by being universally prescribed.
Philippa Foot|Description and prescription are not separate in morality; value-judgements enter into descriptions.
Philippa Foot|There are objective and natural features of living things that make them good as members of their species; moral goodness is one of them for us.
Philippa Foot|Evaluations of human will and action share a conceptual structure with evaluations of characteristics and operations of other living things.
Philippa Foot|Evaluations of human will and action should be determined – just like those of human sight, hearing, etc. – by facts about the nature of our species.
Philippa Foot|Mere pleasure or contentment is not identical with human good: objects of deep happiness (home, family, work, friendship, etc.) must be taken into account.
Philippa Foot|Moral action is rational action and goodness is a necessary condition of practical rationality.
Philippa Foot|To ask for a reason for acting rationally (and thus morally) is to ask for a reason where reasons must a priori have come to an end.
Philippa Foot|Virtues can be described in terms of practical rationality: the recognition of reasons for acting determined by general facts about human beings.
Philippa Foot|Moral considerations are on par with other sets of considerations (self-interest, desire-fulfillment, etc.) that generate reasons; one must weigh them all.
John Rawls|Moral and political philosophy have no place for a rigid analytic/synthetic distinction.
John Rawls|If the plurality of persons with separate ends is an essential feature of societies, the principles of social choice cannot be utilitarian.
John Rawls|The construction of justice is guided by our recognition of a range of primary, fundamental goods.
John Rawls|Primary goods: basic rights and liberties, freedom of movement and choice, powers and positions of responsibility, income and wealth, the social bases of self-respect.
John Rawls|The principles of justice should be chosen from an ‘original position’ of equality without knowing our position in society, behind a ‘veil of ignorance’.
John Rawls|Each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive total system of equal basic liberties compatible with a similar system of liberty for all.
John Rawls|Social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are attached to offices and positions open to all under conditions of fair equality of opportunity.
John Rawls|Social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are to the greatest benefit of the least advantaged. (‘difference principle’)
John Rawls|Inequalities in income and wealth could be accepted when these work effectively to improve everyone’s situation starting from equal division.
John Rawls|All reasonable (or decent) persons would construct political ideals that benefit all liberal peoples. (‘overlapping consensus’)
John Rawls|The policies constructed by liberal peoples should direct non-liberal societies to (ideally) all become liberal.
John Rawls|While liberal societies should attempt to tolerate illiberal societies initially, an outlaw state eventually subjects itself to sanctions and intervention.
John Rawls|While citizens may have religious reasons that favor a policy, they must eventually “translate” these reasons into terms that non-believers could accept.
Frank Sibley|Aesthetic properties are only perceived; they cannot be reasoned from lists of non-aesthetic properties – they are not condition-governed.
Frank Sibley|We experience things aesthetically when we exercise our taste – special perceptiveness, sensitivity, or powers of discrimination.
Frank Sibley|Agreement (convergence) among people with taste constitutes the basis from which objective standards can be generated in aesthetic cases.
Thomas Kuhn|Logic and observation are not enough to define scientific reasoning; we must look at its history and at scientists themselves.
Thomas Kuhn|Sciences alternate between periods of ‘normal science’ (‘puzzle-solving’) and periods of ‘crisis’ followed by ‘revolution’.
Thomas Kuhn|It’s only when a paradigm is established that empirical underdetermination is solved and normal science is possible.
Thomas Kuhn|The paradigms eventually use up their capacity to solve empirical puzzles, and are replaced by new paradigms.
Thomas Kuhn|A new paradigm is ‘incommensurable’ with the old one; there is no uncontested evidence and shared nomenclature to choose one.
Thomas Kuhn|A procedure of judgement by the scientific community is required for paradigm-choice.
Thomas Kuhn|If any and every failure to fit the facts were ground for theory rejection, all theories ought to be rejected at all times.
Thomas Kuhn|There is no precise answer to the question how well a theory fits the facts, but we can ask which of two competing theories fits the facts better.
Thomas Kuhn|Falsification consists in the triumph of a new paradigm; it might equally well be called verification.
Thomas Kuhn|The immediate experience of a scientist is also paradigm-embodied: they see a pendulum when they look at a swinging stone.
Thomas Kuhn|There is no absolute distinction between the context of discovery and the context of justification.
Thomas Kuhn|We may have to relinquish the notion that paradigm changes carry scientists closer and closer to the truth.
Thomas Kuhn|The development of science is like biological evolution: an increase in articulation and specialization, without an end goal.
Imre Lakatos|The unit of scientific evaluation is not the individual theory, but a sequence of theories, the ‘research program’ (RP).
Imre Lakatos|Each RP has a refutation-resistant hard core, stubbornly but rationally defended, and often devoid of empirical consequences.
Imre Lakatos|Each RP has a protective belt of auxiliary hypotheses which has to bear the brunt of tests and gets adjusted or replaced, to defend the hard core.
Imre Lakatos|The RP as a whole (hard core plus auxiliary hypotheses) entails empirical predictions and is a falsifiable affair.
Imre Lakatos|Each RP, at any stage, has unsolved problems and undigested anomalies; all theories, in this sense, are born refuted and die refuted.
Imre Lakatos|It may be rational to put an inconsistency discovered in a RP into some temporary, ad hoc quarantine, and carry on.
Imre Lakatos|A RP is progressive if its successive theories deliver novel predictions and some of those novel predictions turn out to be true.
Imre Lakatos|A degenerating RP either fails to predict novel facts at all, or makes novel predictions that are systematically falsified; it may in the end become pseudoscience.
Imre Lakatos|The demarcation of science/non-science is a matter of degree, and can vary with time: a RP might degenerate but later recover its scientific status.
Imre Lakatos|Marxism started out as theoretically progressive but empirically degenerate and ended up as theoretically degenerate as well.
Imre Lakatos|The development of mathematics is an evolutionary, dialectical process: concepts/proofs are initially open-ended and become sharper within a protracted debate.
Paul Feyerabend|We cannot just confront a theory with “the observed facts”; the identity and the significance of these facts are underdetermined.
Paul Feyerabend|The history of science includes revolutions; ‘incommensurable’ alternatives replace existing theories.
Paul Feyerabend|Science flourishes best when there is a proliferation of different paradigms (‘epistemological anarchism’).
Paul Feyerabend|Aesthetic criteria, personal whims, and social factors have a decisive role in the history of science.
Paul Feyerabend|Conventions are not used only in the absence of the object, but exert their influence even when a direct account of the visible object is attempted.
Paul Feyerabend|The history of science is so complex that if we insist on a general methodology the only “rule” will be the useless suggestion: “anything goes”.
Paul Feyerabend|Science is close to myth; it is one of the many forms of thought developed by humans, and not necessarily the best.
Paul Feyerabend|The separation of church and state should be supplemented by the separation of science and state, in order for us to achieve the humanity we are capable of.
Paul Feyerabend|To defend society against science we should place science under democratic control and be intensely sceptical about scientific “experts”.
Louis Althusser|Different ideologies are different representations of our social and imaginary “reality”, not representations of the Real itself.
Louis Althusser|‘Theoretical practice’ of science weeds out ideological notions associated with the original concepts, allowing specific research programs to progress.
Louis Althusser|Genuine philosophy functions as a ‘Theory of theoretical practice’ helping science by distinguishing between ideological concepts and scientific ones.
Louis Althusser|‘Epistemological breaks’, like Marx’s founding of Historical Materialism, are periods when ideological concepts are replaced by scientific ones.
Louis Althusser|Scientific, ideological, political, and philosophical practices are important parts of the mode of production, not reducible to economic production.
Louis Althusser|Whatever conceptions we have of the nature of human beings or about the proper function of the state are historically generated; they are ideological.
Louis Althusser|History has no subject (such as the economy or human agency) or no goal (such as communism or human freedom) and it does not necessarily “progress”.
Louis Althusser|There is no criterion sufficient to demarcate scientific from ideological concepts; all theoretical concepts are marked by ideology.
Louis Althusser|Through a rigorous “scientific” approach to society, economics, and history, we can come close to perceiving the ways that we are inscribed in ideology.
Louis Althusser|Philosophers’ communication of science to politicians and the public can lead to a modest shift from an idealist ideology to one that is more scientific.
Louis Althusser|Hegemony is reliant less on the Repressive State Apparatus than it is on ‘Ideological State Apparatuses’ (ISAs).
Louis Althusser|There are religious, educational, family, legal, political, trade-union, communications (press, TV, etc.), and cultural (arts, sports, etc.) ISAs.
Louis Althusser|ISAs provide the individuals with categories in which they can recognize themselves, believing that their positions within the society are natural.
Louis Althusser|The individuals are ‘interpellated’ as (free) ‘subjects’ by the ISAs in order that they shall make the actions of their subjection all by themselves.
Louis Althusser|A Dictatorship of the Proletariat is necessary to create ISAs productive of proletarian or communist subjects.
Michel Foucault|The applications of our concepts and words change over time; we need an archaeology of our thinking.
Michel Foucault|We are not shaped by inevitable anthropological constraints but by historical and political forces that can be changed or overthrown.
Michel Foucault|Each society has its regime of truth: the types of discourse which it accepts as true, the procedures which are valorized for obtaining truth, etc.
Michel Foucault|The concept of ‘man’ is a recent invention, arising at the beginning of the 19th century, and it may be close to its end.
Michel Foucault|‘Man’ is a paradoxical idea, seen both as object and subject.
Michel Foucault|Every kind of discourse is an attempt to exercise power over others.
Michel Foucault|There are three primary techniques of control: hierarchical observation, normalizing judgment, and the examination.
Michel Foucault|The modern prison is a model for factories, hospitals, and schools; a model to control an entire society.
Michel Foucault|The categories of maleness and femaleness were founded and explained as “natural” in discourses claiming the status of scientific truth.
Michel Foucault|The mission to liberate our repressed sexuality is misguided because there is no authentic or natural sexuality to liberate.
Michel Foucault|Power is not repressive but productive; it produces, by cultural practices and scientific discourses, the ways we conceive of ourselves (sexuality, madness, etc.).
Michel Foucault|Individuals internalize the norms laid down by the sciences of sexuality, psychology, etc. and monitor themselves to conform to these norms.
Michel Foucault|We should analyze power relations from the bottom up (families, workplaces, etc.) instead of looking for a center of power.
Michel Foucault|One way of contesting power is by shaping oneself creatively, with new ways of being, new fields of experience, pleasures, relationships, etc.
Michel Foucault|Marxism exists in nineteenth-century thought like a fish in water: it is unable to breathe anywhere else.
Jean-François Lyotard|With computers, knowledge has become information that can be stored in databases, and bought and sold.
Jean-François Lyotard|Knowledge is becoming externalized; it is no longer something that helps towards the development of minds.
Jean-François Lyotard|Knowledge is becoming disconnected from questions of truth; it becomes a commodity.
Jean-François Lyotard|Postmodernism is incredulity towards meta-narratives – overarching stories that put all of our knowledge into a single framework.
Jean-François Lyotard|In the computer age the question of knowledge is now more than ever a question of government, of power.
Jean-François Lyotard|Science does not have any justification in claiming to be a more legitimate form of knowledge than narrative.
Jean-François Lyotard|The principle of performativity (efficiency) merely subordinates science to capital.
Jean-François Lyotard|Postmodern science is about the generation of new ideas rather than the efficient application of existing knowledge.
Jean-François Lyotard|Modern art presents the fact that there is an unpresentable, while postmodern art attempts to present the unpresentable, creating the sublime.
Gilles Deleuze|Matter and life are dynamic; we should see being not in terms of stable identities but in terms of difference.
Gilles Deleuze|Philosophy is the art of forming, inventing, and fabricating concepts palpating the difference that disrupts all projects of identification.
Gilles Deleuze|Philosophy does not consist in knowing; rather, it is categories like Interesting, Remarkable, or Important that determine success or failure.
Gilles Deleuze|Being is univocal and immanent: it folds, unfolds, and refolds itself into the specific forms that constitute the world of our experience.
Gilles Deleuze|The viewpoint of the human subject is not the only perspective; the lives (unfoldings) of other things (an organ, a group, an epoch, etc.) matter.
Gilles Deleuze|Substance is temporal in character: the past is a realm of virtual differences that exist in the present in actualized form.
Gilles Deleuze|Duration is a unity: not merely a unity of past and present, but of past, present, and future.
Gilles Deleuze|The eternal return is the recurrence of difference itself; to affirm it is to set free the active and unpredictable forces of creativity.
Gilles Deleuze|Tools, organs, individuals, groups, states, etc. and combinations of these can all be seen as ‘machines’ in terms of the creative connections they make.
Gilles Deleuze|‘Machines’ are not mechanisms; they evolve, mutate, and reconnect with other machines, in creative and unpredictable ways.
Gilles Deleuze|Desire, seen machinically, is a creator of connections (sexual, political, etc.), not a lack that must be filled.
Gilles Deleuze|Economic modes of production do not define machinic connections; it is the other way around.
Gilles Deleuze|Our political thought must not be like a tree (with a definite structure) but like a rhizome with no beginning/end and no particular shape.
Gilles Deleuze|We are composed of lines of rigid segmentarity (family-profession, etc.) and lines of flight carrying us across segments in unpredictable ways.
Gilles Deleuze|The state does not mediate or liberate; it is parasitic, powerful, and oppressive – a force for conformity through abstract machines like discipline.
Gilles Deleuze|Capitalism deterritorializes, but instead of freeing lines of flight, it captures and stifles them to serve its own purposes.
Gilles Deleuze|Oedipus is an abstract machine of capitalism: it says that your desires are really directed toward your own family, placing them in the service of capital.
Arthur Danto|There is a kind of transhistorical essence in art (independent of particular styles), but it only discloses itself through history.
Arthur Danto|Artists live and produce within the horizon of a closed historical period; some of the limitations are technical, some stylistic.
Arthur Danto|To see something as art requires something the eye cannot decry – an atmosphere of artistic theory, a knowledge of the history of art: an art world.
Arthur Danto|The decisions of the art world concerning works of art are not merely fiats of arbitrary will; they are less a matter of declaration than of discovery.
Arthur Danto|To see an artwork without knowing it is an artwork is comparable to what one’s experience of print is, before one learns to read.
Arthur Danto|Art is naming less a practice than a movement or even a period, with marked temporal boundaries.
Arthur Danto|Art came to an end (in the 1960s) when it became self-conscious and turned to philosophy for a definition which is not based on styles or narratives.
Arthur Danto|To be a work of art is to be (i) ‘about’ something and (ii) to ‘embody its meaning’.
Arthur Danto|There is a difference between the work of art and the physical body that embodies it; the same physical object might embody different artworks.
Arthur Danto|Artworks and real things cannot any longer be told apart by visual inspection alone (e.g. pop art, conceptual art).
Arthur Danto|In post-historical art without a master narrative, anything can be art; it is a stable period of freedom, pluralism, and happiness.
Arthur Danto|A general theory of quality might contain aesthetic goodness not as a defining trait but as a special case after the end of art.
Arthur Danto|Everything is possible in that all forms are ours, but to mention, not to use; we must still relate to them in our own way, partly defining our period.
Arthur Danto|The true heroes of the post-historical period are the artists who are masters of every style without having a painterly style at all.
Arthur Danto|The possibility of transformative personal experiences justifies the production, the maintenance, and the exhibition (museums) of art.
Arthur Danto|Post-historical art seeks a more immediate contact with people than the museum makes possible.
Arthur Danto|A pluralistic art world calls for a pluralistic art criticism which takes each work up on its own terms (history, causes, embodied meanings, references, etc.).
George Dickie|A work of art is an artifact upon which the status of candidate for appreciation is conferred by a certain social institution (the artworld).
George Dickie|When an artwork’s status depends upon non-exhibited characteristics a simple look at the object will not necessarily reveal that status.
George Dickie|There are not various sorts of attending, but only attending or failing to attend; the concept of an aesthetic attitude is not viable.
George Dickie|Aesthetic experience is special because it involves attending to some things rather than others; it is not how we attend, but what we attend to that matters.
Michael Dummett|A speaker’s understanding of their own language comprises an ability to conceptualize the world.
Michael Dummett|Psychology and linguistics can offer causal theories of language, but language is best seen as an activity of rational agents.
Michael Dummett|Understanding one aspect of language doesn’t require an understanding of the rest of it.
Michael Dummett|Words have meaning only insofar as they contribute to the meaning of sentences.
Michael Dummett|Communication is of the essence of language.
Michael Dummett|Speakers internalize conventional rules that are social norms; understanding requires reference to this social context.
Michael Dummett|Understanding is based upon sensitivity to direct, canonical evidence for sentences, which is limited.
Michael Dummett|Reality is constrained by the possibility of knowledge of it; it has gaps because the truths of some sentences are undecidable.
Hilary Putnam|The statements of science are either true or false and their truth/falsity does not consist in describing regularities in human experience.
Hilary Putnam|If science was not describing an objective reality, then it would be a miracle that scientific theories were successful in prediction and control.
Hilary Putnam|Quantification over mathematical entities is indispensable for science; we should accept the existence of mathematical entities in question.
Hilary Putnam|“Truth” is some sort of ideal coherence of our beliefs with each other and with our experiences, not correspondence with mind-independent “states of affairs”.
Hilary Putnam|“Objects” do not exist independently of conceptual schemes; we cut up the world into objects when we introduce one or another scheme of description.
Hilary Putnam|There can be equally coherent but incompatible conceptual schemes which fit our experience equally well.
Hilary Putnam|The meaning of a concept depends on its role in a network (‘cluster’) of concepts, which can change in the light of experience.
Hilary Putnam|If the analytic sentences are all consequences of some finite list of meaning postulates, then there must be synthetic truths in mathematics.
Hilary Putnam|The meanings of words and the identities of our thoughts are not purely psychological, they are affected by their worldly context.
Hilary Putnam|Our scientific knowledge allows us to reach essentialist hypotheses such as “Water = H₂O”.
Hilary Putnam|One cannot refer to certain kinds of things, e.g. trees, if one has no causal interaction at all with them, or with things in terms of which they are described.
Hilary Putnam|A brain in a vat being deceived by mad scientists cannot think of brains or vats; they play no part in explaining its neural inputs.
Hilary Putnam|We cannot be brains in vats being deceived by mad scientists, because we can think of brains in vats.
Hilary Putnam|We can imagine people who develop the ability to suppress all involuntary pain behavior (and even talk of pain); logical behaviorism is mistaken.
Hilary Putnam|Mental states are not identical to physical states because a mental state can be realized by multiple physical states (in different organisms).
Hilary Putnam|Mental states are computational states, not identified by their physical realizations but by their functional roles.
Hilary Putnam|Truth cannot be defined in terms of verification; knowledge claims are responsible to reality.
Hilary Putnam|Art does not give us empirical knowledge but conceptual knowledge of a possibility, of the world as it looks to someone else.
Edmund Gettier|There are cases where a belief is true and justified without being knowledge; the “justified true belief” definition of knowledge is problematic.
Noam Chomsky|The basic principles of all languages, and the basic range of concepts they are used to express, are innately represented in the human mind. (Universal grammar)
Noam Chomsky|Language learning consists of the unconscious construction of a grammar from the innate principles, with cues from the child’s linguistic environment.
Noam Chomsky|Linguistic behaviour is essentially uncaused – enabled by a distinct set of innate principles but innovative, or creative.
Noam Chomsky|The mind is a computational network of innate, automatic, independent modules (e.g. language) interacting to yield perception, cognition, and thought.
Noam Chomsky|The faculty of language in the broad sense (FLB) includes perceptual-articulatory systems (for sound and sign) and conceptual-intentional systems (for meaning).
Noam Chomsky|The faculty of language in the narrow sense (FLN) amounts to the recursive computational system alone.
Noam Chomsky|There are homologues and analogs in other species for the FLB; FLN is what makes human beings cognitively distinct from other creatures.
Noam Chomsky|Languages should not be defined as ‘E-languages’ (extensional, external) but as ‘I-languages’ (individual, internal, intensional).
Noam Chomsky|There are problems (topics/phenomena that fall under the scope of our capacity for comprehension or explanation) and mysteries (that fall outside of such a scope).
Noam Chomsky|The media serve the interests of state and corporate power, supporting established privilege and limiting debate and discussion accordingly.
Noam Chomsky|The responsibility of the writer as a moral agent is to try to bring the truth about matters of human significance to an audience that can do something about them.
Jean Baudrillard|Marxism does not break radically enough with capitalism, offering itself merely as a more efficient and equitable organization of production.
Jean Baudrillard|Pre-capitalist societies were governed by laws of symbolic exchange rather than production and utility.
Jean Baudrillard|The catastrophe of modernity and eruption of postmodernity is produced by the unfolding of technological revolution.
Jean Baudrillard|In addition to their use-value and exchange-value, commodities have sign-value: the expression and mark of style, prestige, luxury, power, etc.
Jean Baudrillard|Postmodern societies are organized around representations that ‘simulate’ reality as in television, cyberspace, and virtual reality.
Jean Baudrillard|Simulation is no longer a question of imitation, nor duplication, nor even parody; it is substituting the signs of the real for the real.
Jean Baudrillard|Economics, politics, social life, and culture are all governed by the mode of simulation now.
Jean Baudrillard|Entertainment and information technologies provide experiences more intense and involving (‘hyperreality’) than the banal everyday life.
Jean Baudrillard|As simulations proliferate, they come to refer only to themselves: a carnival of mirrors reflecting images projected from other mirrors.
Jean Baudrillard|The masses are now bathed in a ‘media massage’; classes disappear, and politics is dead, as are the dreams of disalienation, liberation, and revolution.
Jean Baudrillard|In postmodern societies, the masses seek spectacle and not meaning; they implode into a ‘silent majority.’
Jean Baudrillard|Social theory is losing its very object as meanings, classes, and difference implode into a black hole of non-differentiation.
Richard Lewontin|Scientists and science are molded and used by the dominant social and economic forces in society; science is part of ideology.
Richard Lewontin|The reductionist view of the biological world is a reflection of the ideologies of the individualistic bourgeois revolutions of the eighteenth century.
Richard Lewontin|It is a mistake to atomize an organism into a bundle of traits; the organism should be treated as an integrated whole.
Richard Lewontin|Any entities in nature (molecules, genes, organisms, populations, species, ecosystems) that have variation, reproduction, and heritability may evolve.
Richard Lewontin|The genes and the environment work together with a division-of-labor model; separating out their causal contributions makes no sense.
Richard Lewontin|The organism is not determined by its genes/environment or by their interaction; it bears a significant mark of random processes.
Richard Lewontin|‘Spandrels’, hitchhiking, vestigial traits, and developmental constraints prove why assuming that every trait of every organism is adaptive is a mistake.
Richard Lewontin|It is not that organisms find environments/niches to adapt to, they construct them in a dialectical process; the environment of organisms is coded in their DNA.
Richard Lewontin|The organism influences its own evolution, by being both the object of natural selection and the creator of the conditions of that selection.
Richard Lewontin|The genes, in making possible the development of human consciousness, have surrendered their power to a new level of causation: social interaction.
Harry Frankfurt|A ‘person’ is someone who has second-order volitions – who cares about what desires they have.
Harry Frankfurt|Free action does not require that an agent “could have done otherwise”.
Harry Frankfurt|An agent is free when their first-order intentions causing action are in harmony with their reflective second-order intentions.
Harry Frankfurt|None of the modes of equality (of resources, welfare, opportunity, respect, rights, consideration, concern, etc.) is intrinsically valuable.
Harry Frankfurt|What is morally important with regard to money is that everyone should have enough (to be content) – not that they should have the same.
Harry Frankfurt|Egalitarian concerns can be alienating, distracting people from recognizing their authentic ambitions deriving from the character of their own lives.
Harry Frankfurt|Economic egalitarianism may be instrumentally valuable as a necessary condition for the attainment of goods that do genuinely possess intrinsic value.
Harry Frankfurt|Unlike liars, bullshitters have a complete disregard and carelessness for the truth; they are more harmful.
Bernard Williams|The possibility of knowledge of any kind depends upon the possibility of an ‘absolute conception’ of the world, maximally independent of human peculiarities.
Bernard Williams|The aim of objectivity in science is to approach as closely as possible to the absolute conception of the world, compensating for the distortions of observers.
Bernard Williams|There can be no external reasons for action; once they enter into our explanations of our actions, they become internal.
Bernard Williams|If there can be no external reasons for action, no absolute conception of ethics will be available to us.
Bernard Williams|Ethical truth can only be local and historically contingent (not timeless or universal), based on reasons deriving from people’s actual motives and practices.
Bernard Williams|Vulgar moral relativism is inconsistent: it attaches a nonrelative morality of toleration or non-interference to a view of morality as relative.
Bernard Williams|We blame people not only for what they have voluntarily done, but also for what they have done as a matter of luck (‘moral luck’).
Bernard Williams|A utilitarian assessment of duty is a form of alienation because the agent’s own welfare counts simply as someone’s welfare.
Bernard Williams|My freedom is reasonably not taken to include freedom from my past, my character, and my desires: I must see them as within the boundaries of the self.
Bernard Williams|Immortality is undesirable: one would either run out of aims to pursue and get bored, or pursue new aims that have nothing to do with one’s current self.
Bernard Williams|There is a distinction between the history of ideas (focusing on the historical context) and the history of philosophy which is part of philosophy.
Bernard Williams|Historically impoverished, reductionist styles of philosophy and science stand in the way of our understanding who we are.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|There is such a property as being a good K only if K is a ‘goodness-fixing’ kind (e.g. toasters, knifes, but not smudges).
Judith Jarvis Thomson|Things can be ‘good-modified’ as in “good for use in making cheesecake” or “good for Alfred” – a smudge can be “good for using in a Rorschach test”.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|There is no such thing as a good act, but only acts that are good in some respect (e.g. a moral respect).
Judith Jarvis Thomson|There are five kinds of goodness that are all natural properties: the useful, the skilful, the enjoyable, the beneficial, and the moral.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|Moral goodness is a matter of having character traits that promote the other kinds of goodness (particularly by being beneficial to oneself and others).
Judith Jarvis Thomson|The idea that we should act in such a way as to make the world better than it otherwise would have been is meaningless: there is no such relation as “better than”.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|Our evidence that moral hypotheses are true is that they would be explained by observation; the data explain the hypotheses.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|The right to life does not include the right to be given the bare minimum one needs for continued life, nor the right not to be killed.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|Having a right to life does not guarantee having a right to be given the use of another person’s body; abortion is not always morally impermissible.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|There are some cases in which the unborn person has a right to the use of its mother’s body, in which abortion is impermissible.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|There is no Principle of Moral Inertia – no prima facie duty to refrain from interfering with existing states of affairs just because they are so.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|When a passenger has to make the choice in the Trolley Problem, the doing/allowing status changes but our intuitions about the right choice do not.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|We may be allowed to better distribute a threat/good by doing something to it, but not by doing something to a person.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|The thesis that killing is worse than letting die cannot be used unconditionally; there are circumstances in which one may choose to kill.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|The thesis of temporal parts is absurd because it implies that material objects are constantly coming into existence ex nihilo.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|Artifacts are not identical to but rather constituted by quantities of stuff; the material parts can change while the artifact remains by keeping its shape.
Judith Jarvis Thomson|Reality is like an over-crowded attic, some of its contents interesting, and most junk – there is no need to deny the junk; we can simply leave it to gather dust.
Jacques Derrida|Writing is different from speech; the reader is absent when we write, and the author and his/her intentions are absent when we read.
Jacques Derrida|The legibility of the text is indifferent to the communicational parameters (context, speaker, receiver, message) it first had.
Jacques Derrida|The intended meaning of a text is incapable of being stabilized; rereading may activate new meanings (‘iteration’).
Jacques Derrida|Every text is riddled with gaps, holes, and contradictions (‘aporias’).
Jacques Derrida|The meaning of the words we use depends on their relationship to (difference from) the words we are not using.
Jacques Derrida|Meaning is always deferred in language; it depends on what else we say, which depends on what else we say, and so on.
Jacques Derrida|Meaning is not self-contained within the text, not even present to the author, because it is a matter of deferring and differing (‘différance’).
Jacques Derrida|We should expose the Platonistic dual hierarchies (good/evil, mind/body, etc.) in texts and mark them with new terms (‘deconstruction’).
Alvin Plantinga|Many rational (perceptual, logical, memory, etc.) beliefs do not require justification; similarly, theistic belief without justification is not irrational.
Alvin Plantinga|Warrant, not justification, is the property – or quantity – enough of which is what makes the difference between knowledge and mere true belief.
Alvin Plantinga|A belief has warrant just if it is produced by properly functioning cognitive faculties in an environment propitious for that exercise according to a design plan.
Alvin Plantinga|We humans may have a God-given faculty (“sensus divinitatis”) which produces in us theistic beliefs that are properly basic with respect to warrant.
Alvin Plantinga|There is a possible world in which maximal greatness is instantiated.
Alvin Plantinga|Necessarily, a being is maximally great only if it has maximal excellence in every world.
Alvin Plantinga|Necessarily, a being has maximal excellence in every world only if it has omniscience, omnipotence, and moral perfection in every world.
Alvin Plantinga|God did not bring into existence any states of affairs; God actualizes states of affairs, and could not have actualized logically impossible states of affairs.
Alvin Plantinga|A world containing creatures who are morally free is more valuable, all else being equal, than a world containing no free creatures at all.
Alvin Plantinga|If a person suffers from ‘transworld depravity’, then it isn’t within God’s power to actualize any world in which that person is free but does no wrong.
Alvin Plantinga|It’s possible that every essence suffers from transworld depravity; so it’s possible that God could not have created a world with moral good but no moral evil.
Alvin Plantinga|It’s possible that natural evil is due to the free actions of nonhuman persons (Satan) and it was not within God’s power to create a world with less evil.
Alvin Plantinga|The fact that the theist doesn’t know why God permits evil is a fact about the theist; it isn’t by itself relevant to the rationality of belief in God.
Alvin Plantinga|A successful atheological objection must be to the truth of theism (de facto), not to its rationality, justification, intellectual respectability, etc. (de jure).
Alvin Plantinga|According to the conjunction of naturalism and evolution, there would be many ways in which our beliefs could be false, but adaptive nonetheless.
Alvin Plantinga|The devotees of the conjunction of naturalism and evolution (N&E) have a defeater for just any belief they hold; N&E is self-defeating.
Luce Irigaray|Only one form of subjectivity exists in Western culture (religion, science, language, philosophy, psychoanalysis, etc.) and it is male.
Luce Irigaray|Women have historically been seen as “mother” (and “the other”) associated with nature, body, irrationality, and unthinking matter.
Luce Irigaray|Separating mind and body is unethical insofar as it perpetuates the division in culture between man/mind and woman/body.
Luce Irigaray|Science itself is biased towards categories typically personified as masculine (e.g. solids as opposed to fluids).
Luce Irigaray|Language systems are malleable, and largely determined by power relationships that are in flux.
Luce Irigaray|Inclusion of women in the current form of subjectivity is not the solution; there should be more than one subject position in language.
Luce Irigaray|Both sexes have to reconfigure their subjectivity so that they both understand themselves as belonging equally to nature and culture.
Luce Irigaray|Women are not, strictly speaking, a class and their dispersion in several classes makes their political struggle and their demands sometimes contradictory.
John Searle|Five types of speech acts: assertives (e.g. statements), directives (e.g. orders), commissives (e.g. promises), expressives (e.g. thanks), and declarations (e.g. hirings).
John Searle|There are indirect speech acts where the speaker performs one kind of speech act by means of performing another. (“You are standing on my foot.”)
John Searle|Mental states are intrinsic and irreducible features (emergent properties) of certain very complex kinds of biological system.
John Searle|Unless a mental state has the potential to be conscious, it does not qualify as genuinely mental.
John Searle|Consciousness is an on/off switch: you are either conscious or not, but once conscious, there can be different degrees of it, from drowsiness to alertness.
John Searle|The syntactic structure of computer programs is not sufficient (or necessary) for semantics; they do not have minds, understanding, or consciousness.
John Searle|Because mental states are biological, they can cause and be caused by physical changes in human bodies.
John Searle|Our experiences of free action contain both indeterminism and rationality; quantum mechanics must enter into the explanation of consciousness.
John Searle|It is false that every intentional state must have an object; the existence of hallucinations does not refute direct realism.
John Searle|Meanings are in the head of the speaker; they do not depend upon external, causal or contextual determinations.
John Searle|Language and other artifacts have intentionality derived from the ‘original/intrinsic intentionality’ of our conscious mental states.
John Searle|Signification is illocutionary; linguistic conventions are sufficient to endow intentional meaning, independent of the presence of the sender.
John Searle|Proper names function not as descriptions, but as pegs on which to hang (a sufficient but unspecified number of) descriptions.
John Searle|We-intentions (collective intentions) are held by individuals but they are not reducible to I-intentions.
John Searle|Objective social reality (games, money, language, etc.) is created by means of we-intentions.
John Searle|Human beings have the capacity to be motivated by desire-independent reasons for action (such as promises).
John Searle|It is possible to derive ‘ought’ from ‘is’ if we start from facts which concern human institutions (such as promises).
John Searle|Many animals have perceptual organs and behaviors similar to ours, so we find it irresistible to suppose that they have intentional states.
Jürgen Habermas|Philosophy must engage in a fully cooperative relationship with the social sciences and the empirical disciplines in general.
Jürgen Habermas|The ‘public sphere’ (modern European cafés, newspapers, etc.) is where all citizens engage in free critical debate and ‘public opinion’ is formed.
Jürgen Habermas|Formal legislative institutions must accurately represent and address deliberations going on in the informal public sphere.
Jürgen Habermas|Thanks to the ‘communicative power’ emerging from the public sphere, a community can both author and rationally abide by the law.
Jürgen Habermas|Mass consumer capitalism led to the ‘re-feudalization’ of the public sphere; corporations control the media and citizens become atomized consumers.
Jürgen Habermas|Reaching understanding is the inherent telos of speech; when actors speak with this sort of practical attitude, they engage in ‘communicative action’.
Jürgen Habermas|We understand a speech act when we know the kinds of reasons that a speaker could provide in order to convince a hearer.
Jürgen Habermas|Publicly defendable validity claims include claims to empirical truth, moral rightness, ethical authenticity, personal sincerity, and aesthetic value.
Jürgen Habermas|Many speech acts, including non-constatives, involve a set of tacit validity claims regarding their own sincerity, (social) rightness, and truth.
Jürgen Habermas|When disagreement persists we may transition to ‘discourse’ in which the validity claims that are always immanent within speech become explicit.
Jürgen Habermas|The ‘lifeworld’ is the domains of action (family, social interactions, culture, etc.) in which consensual modes of action coordination predominate.
Jürgen Habermas|‘Systems’ are the predefined situations (markets, bureaucracies, etc.) in which the demands of communicative action are relaxed, within legal limits.
Jürgen Habermas|The self-perpetuating logic of systems can, if unchecked, colonize and destroy the lifeworld: strategic action must be balanced by communicative action.
Jürgen Habermas|Ideal pragmatic presuppositions for dialectical procedures are full inclusion, equality, honesty, and non-coercion.
Jürgen Habermas|Only those action norms are valid to which all possibly affected persons could agree as participants in rational discourse. (Discourse principle)
Jürgen Habermas|For empirical truth claims, the objective world is the truth-maker; moral rightness, unlike truth, means ideal warranted assertibility.
Jürgen Habermas|Both believers and non-believers are involved in a complementary learning process, and translation makes demands on both sides.
Jürgen Habermas|Enlightenment is an unfinished project but the best hope for human emancipation is in a correction and completion of Enlightenment.
Richard Rorty|There is no absolute distinction between the contributions of language and the world to the truth of what we say.
Richard Rorty|Tools (a hammer or a belief or a statement) cannot take one out of touch with reality; no organism is ever more or less in touch with reality than others.
Richard Rorty|Knowledge is a matter of conversation and of social practice, rather than an attempt to mirror nature.
Richard Rorty|Our acculturation is what makes certain options live, or momentous, or forced, while leaving others dead, or trivial, or optional.
Richard Rorty|While “truth” has various important uses, it does not itself name a goal towards which we can strive, over and above warrant or justification.
Richard Rorty|Philosophy is not any longer a constructive discipline; it is an edifying one concerned to expose illusion and to keep the conversation going.
Richard Rorty|We should look forward to a post-Philosophical culture in which philosophy amounts to a study of the advantages of the various ways of talking.
Richard Rorty|We need different non-essentialist descriptions of ourselves for predicting and controlling ourselves, for deciding what to do, what meaning our lives shall have.
Richard Rorty|Intellectual and moral progress are best described by metaphors of (creative) evolutionary development, not metaphors of progressively less distorted perception.
Richard Rorty|Social-political movements do not need philosophical foundations; all philosophers can do is to offer pieces of special-purpose ammunition.
Richard Rorty|Our incorrigibility about our mental states is not infallibility, but only systematic invulnerability to correction by others under most circumstances.
Richard Rorty|“What is the nature of the mind?” is not a good question; what needs to be explained is simply our behavior, our perceptual/introspective reports.
Richard Rorty|The mental-physical distinction is a cultural artifact; our concept of mind is a blur to be discarded in favor of smaller, handier, more useful concepts.
Richard Rorty|The ineffability of the mental serves the same cultural function as the ineffability of the divine – it vaguely suggests that science does not have the last word.
Jerry Fodor|Every event that falls under a special science predicate also falls under a physical predicate, but not vice versa.
Jerry Fodor|The special sciences are ‘autonomous’ with their irreducible generalizations about irreducible and casually efficacious higher-level properties.
Jerry Fodor|Brain states are like computer states, capable of representation in virtue of causal connections with the world.
Jerry Fodor|Thought draws upon brain states which function as sentence-like representations – an innate ‘language of thought’ (‘mentalese’).
Jerry Fodor|The causal roles that define mental properties are provided by empirical psychology – not by commonsense psychology or analyses of the meanings of mental terms.
Jerry Fodor|Linguistic form recognition can’t be context-driven because context doesn’t determine form; it must be carried out by largely encapsulated processes.
Jerry Fodor|Cognitive input systems (for perception and language) are modules: domain-specific computational systems with informational encapsulation.
Jerry Fodor|Confirmation in science is isotropic: everything that the scientist knows is, in principle, relevant to determining what else they ought to believe.
Jerry Fodor|Confirmation in science is Quineian: the degree of confirmation of a hypothesis is sensitive to global properties of the entire belief system.
Jerry Fodor|The brain’s central systems of belief fixation, thought, etc. must be isotropic and Quineian, thus domain-neutral, unencapsulated, non-modular.
Jerry Fodor|It is only the modular cognitive systems that we have any hope of understanding; there is nothing to know about the central systems with universal connectivity.
Jerry Fodor|All cognitive psychologies thus far proposed, modular or not, imply epistemic boundedness (constraints on the beliefs that we can entertain).
Jerry Fodor|The complexity of our minds is irrelevant to the question of whether they’re the products of natural selection.
Jerry Fodor|The theory of natural selection cannot predict/explain what traits are selected-for and what traits are free-riders.
Thomas Nagel|We cannot altogether abandon our subjectivity and fully objectify our knowledge (from a ‘view from nowhere’).
Thomas Nagel|Objective knowledge about an organism’s behaviour and physiology does not allow us to form a conception of its subjective experience.
Thomas Nagel|Materialism is incomplete even as a theory of the physical world, since the physical world includes conscious organisms.
Thomas Nagel|Any evolutionary account of the place of reason presupposes reason’s validity and cannot confirm it without circularity.
Thomas Nagel|Consciousness, reason, and value cannot be products of evolution; they might be among the basic aspects of the universe, guiding evolution.
Thomas Nagel|Ethics is a branch of psychology; susceptibility to certain motivational influences, including altruism, is a condition of rationality.
Thomas Nagel|We do not have to choose between utilitarianism, theories of individual rights, and egalitarianism; a plausible social morality will show the influence of them all.
Thomas Nagel|There are prudential, rational, timeless, internal reasons for action, independent of our current concerns.
Thomas Nagel|Reasons for action are impersonal; if I act in some way on my own behalf, I should act the same way on behalf of others similarly situated.
Thomas Nagel|Only beings capable of practical reason can recognize value but once they recognize it, they find it in the lives of creatures without reason or consciousness.
Thomas Nagel|There is no crucial experiment to establish/refute moral realism; its validity is a comparative matter, as it is in other domains (science, history, etc.).
Thomas Nagel|There are four types of moral luck: resultant luck, circumstantial (situational) luck, causal luck, and constitutive luck.
Thomas Nagel|When we take an external view of ourselves and recognize what we do as arbitrary, it does not disengage us from life; there lies our absurdity.
Thomas Nagel|If there is no reason to believe that anything matters, then that doesn’t matter either; we can approach our absurd lives with irony instead of heroism or despair.
Thomas Nagel|Given a knockdown argument for an intuitively unacceptable conclusion, one should assume there is probably something wrong with the argument.
Sandra Harding|Subjects of knowledge are embodied and socially located; ‘strong objectivity’ requires that they be placed on the same critical plane as the objects of knowledge.
Sandra Harding|The “scientific world view” is, in fact, a view of (dominant groups in) modern, Western societies.
Sandra Harding|Trees, rocks, and electrons appear to natural scientists only as they are already socially constituted, like humans appear to the social scientist.
Sandra Harding|A maximally critical study of scientist communities can be done only from the perspective of those who have been marginalized by such communities.
Sandra Harding|A detached (gender-free) position fails to do justice to facts that women are epistemically privileged with (such as sexual harassment).
Sandra Harding|Starting off research from women’s lives will generate less partial and distorted accounts, not only of women’s lives, but also of the whole social order.
Sandra Harding|Feminist knowledge has started off from women’s lives, but there is no typical or essential woman’s life from which feminisms start their thought.
Sandra Harding|The notion of objectivity is useful in deciding which feminisms generate less partial and distorted accounts of nature and social life.
Sandra Harding|Men, too, must contribute forms of feminist knowledge from their particular social situation, beginning first from women’s lives.
Carol Gilligan|Women tend to assign more importance to the responsibilities arising from personal relationships than to the more abstract claims of justice.
Carol Gilligan|We should accept an ‘ethics of care’ which structures private life in addition to the more ‘masculine’ ethics of rights and duties.
David Hull|We cannot simply apply notions of mathematics and physics to the life sciences; we must think in terms of change, of development.
David Hull|Each species is an individual rather than a kind; the relation between an organism and a species is that of part to whole, not member to kind.
David Hull|Since ‘Homo sapiens’, like all species, is an individual and not a kind, there is no property that defines the essence of humanity.
David Hull|The logical empiricist analysis of reduction is not very instructive in the case of understanding the relationship between Mendelian and molecular genetics.
David Hull|The appropriate levels in biology are not genes, organisms, and species, but replicators, interactors, and lineages.
David Hull|‘Interactors’ are those entities that interact as cohesive wholes with their environments in such a way as to make replication differential.
David Hull|Genes are both replicators and interactors; they are not riding around in helpless and hapless “vehicles”.
David Hull|Organisms are not as discrete, unitary, and well organized as we assume; entities more inclusive than single organisms can act as interactors.
David Hull|Many features of science stem from the interaction between the reward system of citation and its social context (competition, cooperation, etc.).
David Hull|Scientists, like organisms and genes, act altruistically and cooperatively, because altruism at one level is inclusive self-interest at another.
Alvin Goldman|True belief is knowledge only if those aspects of the world which make it true are appropriately involved in causing it to exist.
Alvin Goldman|The causal theory of knowledge allows cases in which there is an appropriate causal connection while there is a lack of knowledge.
Alvin Goldman|Knowledge is true belief that has been generated by a reliable belief-producing mechanism.
Alvin Goldman|Social structures may either contribute to, or interfere with, the discovery and dissemination of truths.
Alvin Goldman|In mental state attribution, one’s own mental states are being used to simulate the workings of the target mental state.
Eli Hirsch|We have many possible existential quantifiers used in different frameworks in natural language.
Eli Hirsch|There is a single reality but it consists of unstructured facts that we carve up differently with our different existential quantifiers.
Robert Nozick|The strongest reason to advocate a libertarian society is that such advocacy follows from a respect for individual rights.
Robert Nozick|Individuals are self-owners; they have rights to their lives, liberty, and the fruits of their labor.
Robert Nozick|The endorsement of the imposition of sacrifices on individuals for social good fails to recognize the status of individuals as ends-in-themselves.
Robert Nozick|Patterned conceptions of distributive justice cannot be reconciled with the individual liberty to make voluntary, consensual transactions.
Robert Nozick|Just outcomes are those arrived at by the separate just actions of individuals; a particular distributive pattern is not required for justice.
Robert Nozick|The various programs of the modern liberal welfare state (e.g. taxation) are immoral because they make slaves of the citizens of such a state.
Robert Nozick|Only a ‘minimal state’, limited to the narrow functions of protection against force, theft, fraud, enforcement of contracts, and so on, is justified.
Robert Nozick|We would not want to live as plugged into a machine that would give us preprogrammed pleasurable experiences; what we desire is to live in contact with reality.
Robert Nozick|Knowledge is true belief that tracks the truth by varying according to the state of things in close possible worlds.
Saul Kripke|The descriptions that are candidates for the putative descriptive meaning of a name do not have the same modal profile as the name.
Saul Kripke|There are rigid designators, names/descriptions that refer to the same thing in all possible worlds, which allow essentialist theses.
Saul Kripke|Ordinary proper names are rigid designators of ordinary things, thanks to fixations by ‘initial baptisms’.
Saul Kripke|Natural kind terms are rigid designators: if “water” refers in the actual world to H₂O then it refers in all counterfactual situations to stuff with the same structure.
Saul Kripke|There are empirical necessary truths. (e.g. “Water is H₂O.”)
Saul Kripke|There are contingent a priori truths. (e.g. “Jack the Ripper is the man responsible for the East End murders.”)
Saul Kripke|There are three types of essential necessity: origin, substance, and form.
Saul Kripke|A has the “identity” property of being necessarily identical with A; if A = B, they share all their properties, so the identity must also be necessarily true.
Saul Kripke|Pain without physical realization (and vice versa) is conceptually possible; mental states are not identical to states of the nervous system.
Saul Kripke|For any given world W, there is some subset W' of W such that each element of W' is accessible from W; these are the worlds that are possible relative to W.
Saul Kripke|There is a single, semantically coherent and meaningful Liar Sentence, but it is neither true nor false; it falls into a ‘truth value gap’.
Larry Laudan|The history of science is full of empirically successful theories that are shown to be false/non-referential; therefore, our current theories are likely to be false/non-referential.
Larry Laudan|The aim of science is to secure theories with a high problem-solving effectiveness – a goal which (unlike truth) is not transcendent and unassessable.
Larry Laudan|A change from an empirically well-supported theory to a less well-supported one could be progressive if the latter resolved more conceptual problems.
Larry Laudan|The logic of acceptance/rejection is too restrictive: a theory may not yet be worthy of acceptance but its progress may well warrant further pursuit.
Larry Laudan|The co-existence of rival research traditions is the rule rather than the exception; there is a continuous struggle taking place at any time.
Larry Laudan|There is no fundamental difference in kind between scientific and other forms of intellectual inquiry; all are subject to empirical and conceptual constraints.
Larry Laudan|Aims, methods, and theories in science justify each other in no hierarchical order within an ever-changing network. (‘reticulated model’)
Larry Laudan|The displacement of the idea that facts and evidence matter by the idea that everything is subjective is the most pernicious manifestation of anti-intellectualism.
Bas van Fraassen|The aim of science is not to be identified with individual scientists’ motives.
Bas van Fraassen|Science aims to give us theories which are empirically adequate; and acceptance of a theory involves as belief only that it is empirically adequate.
Bas van Fraassen|Scientific activity is one of construction of models that must be adequate to observable phenomena, and agnostic about truth concerning the unobservable.
Bas van Fraassen|Using a theory involves “immersing” oneself in its world and language; it need not entail a commitment to its entire ontology.
Bas van Fraassen|What counts as observable depends on the epistemic community: observable is observable-to-us by unaided perception (without a microscope, etc.).
Bas van Fraassen|The pragmatic virtues (elegance, simplicity, scope, explanatory power) of a theory can be guides but they are not indicators of its truth.
Bas van Fraassen|The success of scientific theories is no miracle: they are born into a life of fierce competition, and only the successful ones survive.
Bas van Fraassen|It may be that all the potential explanations we have are bad, and hence we would be unwise to believe that one of those is the true one.
Bas van Fraassen|Explanation goes beyond what science reveals to us: it cannot occur unless an appropriate question, offered in a particular context, is provided.
Bas van Fraassen|Universality is not enough to make a truth a law of nature; there are merely incidental or accidental regularities. (e.g. “There are no rivers of milk”.)
Bas van Fraassen|Science does not certify that claims about causation, laws of nature, and other counterfactuals represent objective, context-independent truths.
Frank Jackson|Even complete physical knowledge about color vision cannot contain the sensual information (qualia) we get when we experience colors: physicalism is false.
Frank Jackson|It is possible that certain properties (qualia) of certain mental states make a difference to other mental states though not to anything physical.
Frank Jackson|To be in a phenomenal state is to represent objective properties; a complete physicalist account for seeing colors is possible.
Frank Jackson|Using mental state terms increases our ability to make successful predictions and explanations; mental states are functional properties.
Frank Jackson|We make moral decisions based on factual information, we debate ethical issues, etc.; ethical sentences express truth-apt propositions.
Frank Jackson|No two completely specified situations that differ in their ethical properties can be exactly alike in their descriptive properties.
Frank Jackson|Supervenience entails that ethical properties are descriptive; they can be picked out without using ethical expressions.
Frank Jackson|Ethical terms pick out the properties that play a certain role in the conceptual network determined by ‘mature folk morality’ (after critical reflection).
David Lewis|Worlds that are merely possible are just as real as the actual world we happen to live in; these worlds are separate space-times.
David Lewis|Essentialist claims draw upon similarities between different, but similar, things (counterparts) in different worlds.
David Lewis|The truth condition of an indicative sentence is the set of possible worlds in which it is true.
David Lewis|Counterfactuals are claims to the effect that the consequent is true in the possible worlds which are ‘closest to’ the actual world (except for the antecedent).
David Lewis|Our beliefs about what is possible/impossible concern the worlds that are altogether separate from ours, about which we can have quasi-inductive knowledge.
David Lewis|All there is to the world is a vast mosaic of local matters of particular fact, just one little thing and another. (‘Humean supervenience’)
David Lewis|The fundamental facts about the actual world are physical facts; no fundamental fact about actual reality would be “left out” by an ideal physics.
David Lewis|Laws of nature are the generalizations within collections of truths that perform better than other collections in terms of simplicity and strength.
David Lewis|Where C and E are two distinct actual events, E causally depends on C if and only if, if C were not to occur E would not occur.
David Lewis|Shape properties must be explained in terms of non-indexed properties of temporal parts.
David Lewis|Insofar as our mental states are causes of our physical actions, they too are physical, because physics is a ‘closed’ science.
David Lewis|Supervenience guarantees the reduction of the mental to the physical.
David Lewis|Mental-physical state identities should be restricted to species or even particular organisms.
David Lewis|Mental state terms can be implicitly defined by the Ramsey sentences of our folk theory, specifying causal relations without any mental state terms.
David Lewis|Having the ability to do otherwise in a deterministic world does not entail having the ability to break the laws of nature.
David Lewis|When you have all the objective knowledge about color vision, seeing a new color is not new factual knowledge but a new skill.
David Lewis|Language is grounded in convention (regularities in action and belief that solve coordination problems) of truthfulness (for speakers) and trust (for hearers).
Richard Boyd|The historical progress of the mature sciences is a matter of successively more accurate approximations to the truth about both observable and unobservable phenomena.
Richard Boyd|Purely physical objects, states, properties, etc. need not have definitions in “the vocabulary of physics” or in any other reductive vocabulary.
Richard Boyd|“Cause” refers to natural phenomena whose analysis is a matter for scientists rather than a matter of reductive conceptual analysis.
Richard Boyd|Like healthiness, goodness is a complex natural property that is not directly observable, but nonetheless has a robust causal profile.
Richard Boyd|Moral values are best conceived as natural properties to be identified by inquiries in anthropology and sociology.
Richard Boyd|Moral values are explanatory properties. (e.g. Hitler’s wickedness is part of the explanation of the Holocaust.)
Richard Boyd|The explanatory role of moral values is to guide the identification of the natural properties which underpin this role.
Richard Boyd|Our moral theories and background beliefs are justified together by their overall coherence, like scientific theories and background beliefs.
Richard Boyd|The utilitarian principle provides the basis for a naturalistic treatment of moral values.
John McDowell|Experiences must have propositional contents given that they justify beliefs about the external world.
John McDowell|The conceptual content in experiences is (Kantian) intuitional, not propositional; it entitles us to take things to be so – whether we do is a further question.
John McDowell|The epistemic grounds one has for one’s world-directed judgments are different than those available to one when one hallucinates.
John McDowell|The infallibly knowable fact of a seeming can be taken disjunctively, as constituted either by the fact that things are thus and so or by a mere seeming.
John McDowell|All true ‘thinkables’ (possible objects of thought) are (identical with) facts (at the level of sense).
John McDowell|Language is not just for communication; it is also a repository of tradition, a store of historically accumulated wisdom about what is a reason for what.
John McDowell|We are animals who develop an irreducible, rational ‘second nature’ through language and upbringing, exercising spontaneity and agency.
John McDowell|There are cases where the requirement imposed by the situation and detected by the agent must exhaust their reason for acting as they do.
John McDowell|‘Properly brought up’ people are motivated to do what is required simply by recognizing an obligation, without deliberation.
John McDowell|In moral conversions, a new awareness of external reasons for action creates a shift in motivation.
John McDowell|The fact that the identity of moral values is dependent (like colors) upon a human point of view does not undermine their reality.
Tim Scanlon|An act is wrong if it is disallowed by any set of principles that no one could reasonably reject as a basis for informed, unforced, general agreement.
Tim Scanlon|It is reasons for action that are fundamental in the construction of justice.
Tim Scanlon|In order for there to be truths about reasons, it is not necessary for normative facts to have a kind of metaphysical reality.
Tim Scanlon|Reasons for action are not dependent upon desires (in the directed-attention sense); finding such reasons motivates desires.
Tim Scanlon|Reasons for action are sensitive to contextual considerations; they can sometimes be undermined.
Tim Scanlon|We start from our ordinary common-sense moral judgements and then refine them with our understanding of the world.
Tim Scanlon|There is a core of fundamental human rights, and there are judgements which exhibit a degree of cultural relativity.
Tim Scanlon|The objectivity of reasons for belief and action does not require uniformity of thought and practice; there can be different priorities.
Tim Scanlon|The concept of well-being has less importance than is commonly supposed and there is little to be gained by constructing a theory of it.
Tim Scanlon|Equality is an important political goal but most of the reasons for favoring it can be traced back to fundamental values other than equality itself.
Tim Scanlon|A moral idea of substantive equality may be required to prevent stigmatizing differences in status, to preserve procedural fairness, etc.
Derek Parfit|To be a person, a being must be self-conscious, aware of its identity and its continued existence over time.
Derek Parfit|Persons are constituted by, but not identical with, a physiology, a psychology, and the occurrence of a series of causal and cognitive relations.
Derek Parfit|Personal identity is not what matters in survival over time; what matters is psychological connectedness and/or continuity (‘Relation R’).
Derek Parfit|Since my much later self would be more like a different person than me, how I treat him should fall under the rubric of morality, not self-interest.
Derek Parfit|Only my current (not past or future) desires/aims that are not intrinsically irrational directly generate reasons for my acting.
Derek Parfit|My death only involves that after a certain time, none of the thoughts and experiences that occur will be directly causally related to this brain.
Derek Parfit|If any particular person had not been conceived when they were in fact conceived, it is in fact true that they would never have existed.
Derek Parfit|A change in the identity of the involved parties in the compared outcomes should not affect our moral evaluation.
Derek Parfit|For any population with members having good lives, there can be some larger population whose total happiness is higher, but with members with terrible lives.
Derek Parfit|Consequentialism, Kantianism, and Contractualism ultimately converge on the same answers; they can be incorporated into a single Triple Theory.
Derek Parfit|An act is wrong just when such acts are disallowed by some principle that is optimific, uniquely universally willable, and not reasonably rejectable.
Derek Parfit|Normative truths and our knowledge of them are of a distinctive kind; we should not expect them to be like ordinary, empirical truths and their knowledge.
Derek Parfit|Our wealth is legally ours, but the poorest people have much stronger moral claims to some of this wealth.
Richard Dawkins|The fundamental units of natural selection, the things that survive or fail to survive, that form lineages of copies with random mutations, are genes.
Richard Dawkins|We are survival machines – robot ‘vehicles’ blindly programmed to preserve the ‘selfish’ molecules (‘replicators’) known as genes.
Richard Dawkins|An animal’s behaviour tends to maximize the survival of the genes “for” that behaviour, whether or not those genes are in its body.
Richard Dawkins|Genes can have ‘extended’ phenotypic effects when ‘vehicles’ modify their environment (nests, dams, etc.) or manipulate other organisms.
Richard Dawkins|Human culture evolves thanks to ‘memes’: information units replicating, mutating and being selected.
Richard Dawkins|A cultural trait may have evolved in the way that it has, simply because it is advantageous to itself.
Richard Dawkins|We, alone on earth, can rebel against the tyranny of the selfish replicators.
Daniel Dennett|The idea of evolution by natural selection unifies the realm of meaning and purpose with the realm of mechanism and physical law.
Daniel Dennett|Reasons gradually emerged out of mere causes, ‘what for’s out of ‘how come’s, with no ‘essential’ dividing line between them.
Daniel Dennett|There were reasons tracked by evolution (‘free-floating rationales’) long before there were reason-representers like us.
Daniel Dennett|Adaptationist reasoning is the heart and soul of evolutionary biology, it is not optional.
Daniel Dennett|Comprehension is not the source of competence; it is composed of competences, and it comes in degrees.
Daniel Dennett|Our intentionality is gradually derived from the intentionality of our “selfish genes”, which is derived from the functional context of evolution.
Daniel Dennett|With ‘the intentional stance’ we can treat something as an agent without committing to hypotheses about its internal structures.
Daniel Dennett|Mental states/events and content have no independent and concrete existence; they are ‘real patterns’ interpreted within ‘the intentional stance’.
Daniel Dennett|There could be different, but equally real, patterns discernible in the same noisy world; the choice of a pattern/theory is pragmatic.
Daniel Dennett|Minds are composed of simpler subsystems that are composed of teams of still simpler agents so stupid that they can be replaced by a machine.
Daniel Dennett|Attributions of mental content are founded on an appreciation of the functional roles of the items in question in the biological (engineering) economy of the organism (robot).
Daniel Dennett|There is not a finish line or a center (a ‘Cartesian theater’) in the brain where the content is “presented” to the conscious subject.
Daniel Dennett|A self is like a center of (narrative) gravity: an abstract object, a theorist’s useful fiction – not a thing in the brain.
Daniel Dennett|All mental activity is accomplished in the brain by parallel, competitive processes of interpretation, under continuous editorial revision. (‘Multiple Drafts Model’)
Daniel Dennett|Consciousness is a system of user-illusions evolved to make versions of our cognitive processes accessible to us for purposes of communication.
Daniel Dennett|We can study consciousness objectively by getting the subjects’ verbal accounts of their conscious experiences (‘heterophenomenology’).
Daniel Dennett|Qualia (ineffable, intrinsic, private, directly apprehensible mental properties) are the intentional objects of mistaken beliefs – they simply don’t exist, anywhere.
Daniel Dennett|There might be variations of consciousness from poet to possum to protozoon, and no ‘essence’ of consciousness to discover.
Daniel Dennett|If the competence observed can be explained without appeal to comprehension, we must not indulge in extravagant anthropomorphism for animals.
Daniel Dennett|Memes turned our brains into minds capable of dealing with ideas, thanks to the apps installed in our ‘necktops’.
Daniel Dennett|Brains are computers, but unlike our computers and flip-flops, organisms and neurons are competitive agents; this may be their key difference.
Daniel Dennett|The traditional view of free will, as a personal power isolated from physical causation, is both incoherent and unnecessary as a ground for morality.
Daniel Dennett|‘Evitability’ requires predictability by agents, hence a deterministic world; freedom evolves at the design level, it doesn’t belong at the physical level.
Daniel Dennett|Free will (like colors, dollars, promises) is part of the user-illusion of the manifest image that we shouldn’t want to dismantle; it’s where we live.
Daniel Dennett|The counterfeit people created with AI are the most dangerous artifacts in human history, undermining the trust on which society depends.
Daniel Dennett|Philosophy is not like Euclid’s geometry: there are almost no indubitable truths or axioms, and we must expect vagueness at the penumbra on every concept.
Douglas Hofstadter|A reductionistic but incomprehensible explanation of the brain exists; it needs ‘soft’ concepts like levels, mappings, and meanings in order to be comprehensible.
Douglas Hofstadter|Emergent phenomena like the self and consciousness are ‘Strange Loops’ – paradoxical feedback loops between the bottom and the top levels.
Douglas Hofstadter|Consciousness and intelligence can be lifted right out of the hardware in which they reside; they are high-level, software properties.
Douglas Hofstadter|Intelligence arises out of the composition of unintelligent neurons, just as ‘intelligent’ colony behaviour emerges from unintelligent ants.
Douglas Hofstadter|The “I” is a tremendously effective, indispensable illusion, and falling for it has great survival value; it is the most precious thing we own.
Douglas Hofstadter|Each human head mirrors, and thus houses, a large number of other “I”s – other human beings at vastly differing levels of detail and fidelity.
Douglas Hofstadter|Although any individual’s consciousness is primarily resident in one particular brain, it is also somewhat present in other brains as well.
Douglas Hofstadter|When the central brain is destroyed, tiny fragments of the living individual remain alive in other brains, in personal notebooks, etc.
Douglas Hofstadter|Our decisions are made in the brain by an analogue to a voting process in a democracy as our desires chime in, constrained by external factors.
Douglas Hofstadter|Our will, quite the opposite of being free, is steady and stable, like an inner gyroscope, and it is the stability of our non-free will that makes us who we are.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|Common-sense psychology appears to be stagnant; there are many mental phenomena that folk psychology does not allow us to explain.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|Since folk theories (folk physics, folk biology, etc.) generally turn out to be mistaken, it seems quite improbable that folk psychology will turn out true.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|Introspection may be largely determined by our folk psychological framework; “introspecting” beliefs may be just like “seeing” demonic spirits or celestial spheres.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|As our neuroscientific understanding grows, we will come to see that our current mental state concepts (belief, sensation, qualia, etc.) need to be discarded.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|There is an evolved connection between the faithfulness of the brain’s “world-model” and the propriety of the organism’s behavior but it is not direct.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|Our observational concepts are just as theory-laden as any others; our observational ontology is as dubious or real as our non-observational ontology.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|Specifying some point where neuroscience ends and philosophy of science begins is hopeless because the boundaries are poorly defined.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|Activation vectors are the central kind of representations, and vector-to-vector transformations are the central kind of computations, in the brain.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|A person’s declarative utterance is a one-dimensional projection of a four- or five-dimensional “solid” that is an element in their true kinematical state.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|The more one learns about the brain, the harder it becomes to imagine creatures with brain processes like ours but lacking consciousness.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|Conscience is a brain construct rooted in our neural circuitry; it is not infallible, it develops over time, and is sensitive to social norms.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|Moral judgment is a constraint satisfaction process undergirded by instincts, habits, norms, social skills, values, and problem solving.
Paul & Patricia Churchland|If you intend your action, know what you’re doing, are of sound mind, and are not coerced, then you are responsible for your action.
Ned Block|Since we know that we have brains, and that we have qualia, we know that brain-headed systems can have qualia.
Ned Block|Something (a homunculi-headed or machine simulation) can be functionally equivalent to you, yet there can be prima facie doubt about its qualia.
Ned Block|The capacity to emit sensible responses is not sufficient for intelligence; whether behavior is intelligent is in part a matter of how it is internally produced.
Ned Block|Specifying inputs and outputs in behavioristic terms is chauvinist; it denies mentality to brains in vats and to paralytics.
Ned Block|Functionalism is guilty of either liberalism (classifying systems that lack mentality as having mentality) or chauvinism (the opposite, e.g. species-specific).
Ned Block|Since there is a doubt that qualia are in the domain of psychology, there is a doubt that qualitative states are empirical functional states.
Ned Block|Consciousness is a mongrel concept: there are a number of very different “consciousnesses” that are often conflated, with bad results.
Ned Block|‘Access-consciousness’ (A-consciousness) is representational; it is used in reasoning and rationally guiding speech and action.
Ned Block|‘Phenomenal consciousness’ (P-consciousness) is experience; it is distinct from any cognitive, intentional, or functional property.
Ned Block|A-conscious states must always be states of consciousness of; P-conscious states sometimes are and sometimes are not transitive.
Ned Block|A-consciousness and P-consciousness interact, and there are cases of P-consciousness without A-consciousness (e.g. color perception in babies).
Ned Block|Perception is constitutively nonpropositional, nonconceptual, and iconic, and cognition does not constitutively have any of these properties.
Nancy Cartwright|Fundamental laws abstract from all the detailed ceteris paribus conditions that give phenomenological laws a chance of being true within their specific domains.
Nancy Cartwright|While fundamental laws may play an essential role in the formulation of phenomenological laws, the former are not themselves true.
Nancy Cartwright|A “nomological machine” is a fixed (enough) arrangement of components that will give rise to the kind of regular behaviour represented in laws.
Nancy Cartwright|Laws of nature (as regular associations) hold only ceteris paribus – only relative to the successful repeated operation of a nomological machine.
Nancy Cartwright|Nomological machines might occur naturally in nature, but more often they are engineered by us, as in a laboratory experiment.
Nancy Cartwright|Laws in different domains are not reducible to laws of a more fundamental science because the world does not have a unitary underlying lawlike pattern.
Nancy Cartwright|Science is not searching for laws but constructing models for which the question of truth does not arise.
Nancy Cartwright|Physics works as part of a motley assembly of (natural, biomedical, and social) scientific and engineering disciplines along with practical knowledge.
Nancy Cartwright|A cause is a factor that increases the probability of its effect in every background context.
Nancy Cartwright|There is a great variety of different kinds of causes and causes of the same kind can operate in different ways; there can be no universal account of causality.
Nancy Cartwright|Singular rather than generic causes are fundamental.
Nancy Cartwright|The fundamental facts about nature that ensure that regularities can obtain are not again themselves regularities/laws; they are capacities.
Nancy Cartwright|The higher causal level (depending on capacities) is indispensable for the explanation of what regularities there are in the world.
Nancy Cartwright|Capacities remove the ceteris paribus clause from the causal laws: aspirin always carries the capacity to relieve headache.
Nancy Cartwright|Capacities are of properties and not of individuals: the property of being an aspirin carries with it the capacity to cure headaches.
Simon Blackburn|In our moral judgements we express our feelings (which are a species of desire), not describe them.
Simon Blackburn|Our talk of ethics is quasi-realist; our feelings color our experience of the world by projecting values onto it.
Simon Blackburn|Perhaps we do not need a conception of truth, but only a conception of the particular truths in the plural, the ones that make issues for us from time to time.
Donna Haraway|Western dualisms (self/other, mind/body, male/female, whole/part, maker/made, etc.) have been used to dominate all constituted as others.
Donna Haraway|There is nothing about being “female” that naturally binds women; “being” female is constructed in contested scientific discourses and social practices.
Donna Haraway|The feminist dream of a common language, of perfectly faithful naming of “women’s experience,” is a totalizing and imperialist one.
Donna Haraway|Feminisms do not need to use the perspective of a latent position of moral superiority, victimhood, innocence, and greater closeness to nature.
Donna Haraway|We must refuse an anti-science metaphysics, a demonology of technology, and embrace the task of reconstructing the boundaries of daily life.
Donna Haraway|High-tech culture challenges dualisms like human/machine, mind/body, natural/artificial; we find ourselves to be cyborgs, hybrids, mosaics, chimeras.
Donna Haraway|The cyborg subverts the Western myths of original unity and final completion in an organic whole (Garden of Eden, Marxism, psychoanalysis).
Donna Haraway|A cyborg world can be about a grid of control, but it can also be about a joint kinship with animals and machines, and permanently partial identities.
Donna Haraway|Cyborg myth and politics are a matter of survival; a cyborg identity can be a potent subjectivity synthesized from fusions of “outsider” identities.
Donna Haraway|Cyborg feminism does not search for a new essential unity and a common language; it prefers irony and coalition – affinity, not identity.
Donna Haraway|Relativism is the perfect mirror twin of totalization in the ideologies of objectivity; both deny the stakes in location, embodiment, and partial perspective.
Donna Haraway|Rational knowledge is a process of ongoing critical interpretation among communities; it is not the product of isolated individuals.
Donna Haraway|Feminist objectivity is about embodied and situated knowledges, and against transcendent, unlocatable, and so irresponsible, knowledge claims.
Donna Haraway|To lose authoritative biological accounts of sex seems to be to lose too much – to lose the body itself as anything but a blank page for social inscriptions.
Donna Haraway|When science engages with its objects of knowledge as actors and agents, faithful knowledge can be imagined and can make claims on us.
Susan Haack|Justification of knowledge is not like mathematical proof; it is gradational, like how one determines the reasonableness of entries in a crossword.
Susan Haack|Justification of knowledge requires both foundational experience (like clues in a crossword) and coherent reasons (like intersecting entries in a crossword).
Susan Haack|How good A’s evidence for p is depends on how favorable A’s direct evidence is; how secure A’s direct reasons are; how comprehensive A’s evidence is.
Susan Haack|Gettier-type “paradoxes” are inevitable, and harmless, given the mismatch between the gradational character of justification and the categorical character of knowledge.
Susan Haack|More than one logic is a correct representation of validity, in the sense that it is inaccurate but good enough relative to its goals.
Susan Haack|There’s no “scientific method,” i.e., no method used by all, and only, scientists; scientific inquiry is continuous with everyday empirical inquiry.
Susan Haack|Scientific inquiry is like an extension of everyday inquiry with more rigour, more tools and procedures, and more people (within and across generations).
Susan Haack|For science to be even possible, there must be real kinds and real laws, but there is no guarantee that current scientific vocabulary matches real kinds.
Susan Haack|The changes of meaning in the language of science need not impede inquiry, but can actually advance it when they come closer to real kinds in the world.
Susan Haack|Vulgar pragmatism (of Rorty) undermines the possibility of real inquiry of any kind, and the hope of knowing what would truly improve the condition of society.
Susan Haack|“Feminist epistemology” (“women’s ways of knowing”) reintroduces old, indefensible sexist stereotypes and undermines inquiry by politicizing it.
Susan Haack|The idea that what is to women’s advantage should determine theory-choice undermines the possibility even of determining what is to women’s advantage.
Susan Haack|There is one real world, varied but also integrated, including physical stuff, kinds, laws, etc. and human artifacts, physical, social, intellectual, and imaginative.
Francisco Varela|An organism is an autopoietic machine: a network of processes of production of components which continuously regenerate and realize the network.
Francisco Varela|The domain of problems for a species does not exist “out there” in a pre-given world; living beings and their environments determine each other.
Francisco Varela|The domain of all the interactions in which an autopoietic system can enter without loss of identity is its cognitive domain.
Francisco Varela|Traditional notions of representation and computation, and decompositions of the cognitive system into inner modules (“boxology”) are misleading.
Francisco Varela|Perception consists in perceptually guided action.
Francisco Varela|Cognitive structures emerge from the recurrent sensorimotor patterns that allow action to be perceptually guided.
Francisco Varela|Cognitive (sensorimotor) capacities are embedded in a more surrounding biological, psychological and cultural context.
Francisco Varela|Understanding the complex interplay of brain, body, and world requires the tools and methods of nonlinear dynamical systems theory.
John Worrall|A theory’s predictive success only supplies a plausibility argument in favour of its somehow or other having latched onto the truth.
John Worrall|Assuming that the realist is not talking in some conjectural sense, realism is not compatible with the existence of radical theoretical changes in science.
John Worrall|The successful empirical content of a once-accepted theory is in general carried over to the new theory, but its basic theoretical claims are not.
John Worrall|There is continuity or accumulation in the theory-changes in science, but the continuity is one of form or structure (equations), not of content (ontology).
John Worrall|It is a mistake to think that we can ever “understand” the nature of the basic furniture of the universe.
Peter Singer|Evolution has no moral direction; an evolutionary understanding can explain our differing moral intuitions, but it does not justify them.
Peter Singer|Putting yourself in the place of others is what thinking ethically is all about.
Peter Singer|An action contrary to the preference of any being is, unless this preference is outweighed by contrary preferences, wrong.
Peter Singer|All the arguments to prove the superiority of humans cannot shatter this hard fact: in suffering the animals are our equals.
Peter Singer|We must make radical changes in our treatment of animals involving our diet, farming, scientific experiments, hunting, zoos, etc. to reduce their suffering.
Peter Singer|For ‘impersonal’ animals who are not self-conscious beings aspiring to longer life, the case against killing (without causing pain) is weaker.
Peter Singer|The fact that a being is human, and alive, does not in itself tell us whether it is wrong to take that being’s life; personhood matters.
Peter Singer|To give preference to the life of a being simply because that being is a member of our species would put us in the same position as racists.
Peter Singer|If we can prevent something bad without sacrificing anything of comparable significance, we ought to do it.
Peter Singer|It makes no moral difference whether the person I can help is a neighbor ten yards from me or a stranger ten thousand miles away.
Peter Singer|Reason is capable of presenting us with objective, impartial, non-natural reasons for action.
Martha Nussbaum|Human beings are soft, tender, and capable of being wounded; but it is because of this plant-like nature that we are capable of flourishing.
Martha Nussbaum|Emotions are not just the fuel that powers the psychological mechanism of a creature, they are highly complex and messy parts of the creature’s reasoning.
Martha Nussbaum|Emotions are ‘geological upheavals of thought’: judgments in which people acknowledge their vulnerability and neediness, for their own flourishing.
Martha Nussbaum|Instead of viewing morality as a system of principles to be grasped by the detached intellect, we have to include emotions in ethical reasoning.
Martha Nussbaum|Disgust and shame are hierarchical and connected with restrictions on liberty; the appeal to these emotions in law and public policy is problematic.
Martha Nussbaum|The arts play a central role in human self-understanding: the understanding of an emotion is incomplete unless its narrative history is grasped.
Martha Nussbaum|The theory that best represents our intuition of a dignified human life is the capabilities approach.
Martha Nussbaum|A capability is a real possibility or opportunity for an individual to perform certain functions, in a truly human way.
Martha Nussbaum|Central capabilities: life; bodily health; bodily integrity; senses, imagination, thought; emotions; practical reason; affiliation; other species; play; control over one’s environment.
Martha Nussbaum|Citizens should be guaranteed, via institutions, a social minimum whereby central capabilities can be realized.
Martha Nussbaum|Personal, symbolic subversive gestures offer only a false hope; feminism demands and deserves lasting political, legal, institutional change.
Martha Nussbaum|We can no longer draw the usual line between humans and other animals; experiments reveal that they have sentience, emotion, and various types of intelligence.
Martha Nussbaum|Animals cannot bring a legal claim, but neither can most humans – we need a lawyer to press our claims; animals should also have this simple privilege.
Judith Butler|Gender is produced through ways in which language, bodily gestures, movements, and styles constitute the illusion of an abiding gendered self.
Judith Butler|“I” only exists within signifying practices; gender acts are not performed by the subject, they performatively constitute the subject.
Judith Butler|Gender has no essence, no ontological status apart from the various repetitive acts which constitute its reality.
Judith Butler|The very notion of an essential, “natural” sex is constituted as part of the strategy that conceals gender’s performative character.
Judith Butler|It is impossible to separate gender from the political and cultural intersections (racial, class, ethnic, sexual, regional) in which it is produced.
Judith Butler|Drag subverts the distinction between inner and outer psychic space and mocks both the expressive model of gender and the notion of a true gender identity.
Galen Strawson|Experience is itself the fundamental given natural fact: full recognition of its reality is the obligatory starting point for any realistic version of physicalism.
Galen Strawson|We have no reason to think that we know anything about the physical that contradicts the idea that experiential phenomena are physical phenomena.
Galen Strawson|Emergence can’t be brute: just as the spatial can’t arbitrarily emerge from the non-spatial, the experiential can’t arbitrarily emerge from the non-experiential.
Galen Strawson|If experience emerges from something that is not experience, then that something must already be experiential however primitively or strangely.
Galen Strawson|Real physicalists must accept that at least some ultimates are intrinsically experience-involving; real physicalism entails panpsychism.
Galen Strawson|You do what you do because of the way you are.
Galen Strawson|To be truly responsible for the way you are, you must have intentionally brought it about that you are the way you are, and this sets off an infinite regress.
Galen Strawson|You cannot be truly responsible for the way you are, so you cannot be truly responsible for what you do.
Galen Strawson|It is exactly as just to punish or reward people for their actions as it is to punish or reward them for the (natural) colour of their hair.
Galen Strawson|Human beings differ deeply in a number of ways that affect their experience of the mental self as diachronically continuous or as a narrative.
Galen Strawson|One can have a full sense of the single mental self at any given time without thinking of the self as something that has long-term continuity.
Galen Strawson|Many mental selves exist for a human being, one at a time and one after another for considerably different lengths of time, like pearls on a string.
Graham Oppy|Prior to the introduction of data, naturalism trumps theism on grounds of simplicity (fewer and less complex primitive entities, features, and principles).
Graham Oppy|Considerations about global causal order, cosmic fine-tuning, and the accumulated scientific and a priori knowledge do not favour theism over naturalism.
Graham Oppy|Considerations about morality – moral truth, moral knowledge, conscience, the distribution of virtue, etc. – do not favour theism over naturalism.
Graham Oppy|Considerations about consciousness and reason do not favour theism over naturalism.
Graham Oppy|Considerations about horrendous evil favour naturalism over (standard) theism (with an omnipotent, omniscient, omnibenevolent God).
Graham Oppy|The ways in which theism can be rendered consistent with the amount of evil in our world further increases the simplicity advantage of naturalism.
Graham Oppy|Our lives can have meaning and purpose without an afterlife or an epic cosmic melodrama; the goods of the Aristotelian good life are intrinsically valuable.
Graham Oppy|Given that none of the evidence favours theism over naturalism and that naturalism is simpler, naturalism is to be preferred to theism.
Graham Oppy|We should not be too confident that there is a compelling evidential argument in favour of naturalism over theism; we may not have all the data.
Graham Oppy|The decision between naturalism and theism is a matter for judgement; not all intelligent, reflective, informed people must agree.
Andy Clark|The human mind is not all in the head; it emerges at the productive interface of brain, body, and social and material world.
Andy Clark|If an external object performs a function that we’d regard as mental if it were performed by your brain, then that object is a part of your mind.
Andy Clark|Animals and humans construct cognitive niches – physical structures that transform problem spaces in ways that aid thinking and reasoning.
Andy Clark|My mental states might be partly constituted by the mental states of other thinkers – embodied in my secretary, my accountant, or my collaborator.
Andy Clark|External resources can be included as part of the cognitive system as long as they are reliable, trustworthy, and accessible.
Andy Clark|Conscious experience flows from ‘generative entanglements’ that mix predictions about the world, the body, and our own reactive dispositions.
Andy Clark|The predictive brain is not an insulated inference engine so much as an action-oriented engagement machine.
David Chalmers|The tasks of explaining the performance of the cognitive functions (perception, attention, memory, etc.) are easy problems.
David Chalmers|The task of explaining why the performance of cognitive functions are accompanied by experience is the unique, hard problem of consciousness.
David Chalmers|Even when we have solved all the easy problems of cognitive function, the hard problem of consciousness may still remain unsolved.
David Chalmers|‘Zombies’ (creatures physically and functionally identical to us, but lacking consciousness) are conceivable.
David Chalmers|A natural kind term has a primary intension (its sense, description) and a secondary intension (its reference in this world, and thus in every world).
David Chalmers|Two-dimensional semantics bridge the epistemic and modal domains, in arguing from conceivability to metaphysical possibility.
David Chalmers|The conceivability of ‘zombies’ (and spectrum inversion) and the “knowledge argument” demonstrate that consciousness cannot be functionally analyzed.
David Chalmers|We may have to take experience itself as a fundamental feature of the world, alongside mass, charge, and space-time.
David Chalmers|Fundamental entities bearing micro(proto)phenomenal properties may be constituting the macrophenomenal realm.
David Chalmers|We need to discover the psychophysical principles that connect the properties of physical processes to the properties of experience.
David Chalmers|Consciousness is not a functional state but it arises from (is determined by) functional organization, independently of what it is made of.
David Chalmers|“Information” may be fundamental for experience, with its two aspects corresponding to the physical and the phenomenal features of the world.
David Chalmers|Even a thermostat might have maximally simple phenomenal experience as a maximally simple information-processing structure.
David Chalmers|If an external object performs a function that we’d regard as mental if it were performed by your brain, then that object is a part of your mind.
David Chalmers|My mental states might be partly constituted by the mental states of other thinkers – embodied in my secretary, my accountant, or my collaborator.
David Chalmers|One can survive in a post-singularity world by gradually uploading their brain onto new technology, preserving their consciousness.
David Chalmers|Since physical reality can be characterized by its causal structure involving objects and our experience, virtual reality is in principle on a par with it.
David Chalmers|Virtual reality is a sort of genuine reality, virtual objects are real (digital) objects (with causal powers), and life in VR can be valuable.
James Ladyman|Metaphysics should be naturalized: it should be informed by science (instead of a priori inquiry, intuitions, or common sense) and contribute to the scientific image.
James Ladyman|The institutional filters of science need not mirror individual cognitive capacities: they have a truth-tracking power – partly thanks to mathematics.
James Ladyman|The nature of space, time and matter are not compatible with the ontological priority conferred on individuals in most traditional metaphysics.
James Ladyman|Structural realism should be thought of as metaphysically rather than merely epistemically revisionary: there are no “things” and structure is all there is.
James Ladyman|To be is to be a real pattern: one that indispensibly figures in a projectible generalization allowing us to predict and explain the behavior of the world.
James Ladyman|The world has an objective modal structure that is represented by causal claims and laws in the special sciences using real patterns.
James Ladyman|Ontology is scale-relative: different energy levels and regimes, and different length and time scales, feature different emergent structures of causation and law.
James Ladyman|Particles are not composed by some general part-whole relation, but are the products of dynamics of the real patterns of more fundamental physics.
James Ladyman|Physics is not defined in terms of fundamental building blocks but as the science that holds at the widest range of scales and across all of space and time.
James Ladyman|If there is not, or might not be, a fundamental level of reality, nor ultimate individuals of which everything else is made, then all real patterns are on a par.
James Ladyman|Composition is a real feature of the world and is in general diachronic, dynamical, and domain specific, since it depends on the interaction among parts.
James Ladyman|The problems arising from Ramsification do not arise for ontic structural realism since it eschews an extensional understanding of relations.
